        STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
            Department of Finance
             Bachelor Thesis in Business and Economics
             Fall 2025

           Dividend Anomalies
                   A Comparative Analysis of Sweden and the U.S.

      FRIDA ERIKSSON             ROTHA YIN
             25976@student.hhs.se                         26008@student.hhs.se

                                       Abstract

This paper examines stock price dynamics in the Swedish stock market during dividend months, mirroring the
methodological approaches by Hartzmark and Solonmon (2013). The main objective of this paper is to examine
whether Swedish firms exhibit higher positive abnormal return in months with anticipated dividends, testing the
presence of a phenomenon referred to as “Dividend month premium”. Using Swedish stock market data from
2009 to 2019, we employ Fama French Carhartt factor regression as our primary framework complemented by
daily return analysis around dividend events. Our empirical results support that Swedish firms generate positive
abnormal returns around the dividend month, further challenging the traditional risk based explanation.
However, the magnitude and consistency of the effect is notably weaker and concentrated than those
documented in the U.S. This diminished effect appears to stem from the Swedish institutional settings which
play a significant role on how Swedish investors react to dividend events.

Tutor: Maíra Sontag González, Department of Finance

Examiner: Ramin Baghai, Professor of Finance at the Stockholm School of Economics

Acknowledgements: We want to extend a big thank you to our supervisor Maíra Sontag Gonzáles for her
valuable insights and guidance throughout the entire process. We also want to thank Peter Gavelin and the SSE
library staff for their quick and professional help when we encountered obstacles with gathering data from
LSEG. Lastly, we want to thank Morteza Aghajanzadeh for his informative data workshops.

Key Words:
Dividends Month Premium, Swedish Stock Market, Abnormal Returns, Price Pressure, Ex-day Effect
   1. Introduction

Dividend policy has long been a central topic within finance, where early traditional theories argue that
under perfect market conditions, dividends should not affect firm value and therefore ought to be
irrelevant (Miller and Modigliani, 1961). In reality, however, many studies find that dividend-paying
stocks systematically earn positive abnormal returns around dividend events. This phenomenon is
examined more in detail by Hartzmark and Solomon (2013), whose key finding is what they refer to as
the Dividend Month Premium. They find that U.S. stocks on average earn positive abnormal returns
in months when they are expected to issue dividends and primarily attribute it to temporary price
pressure.

Their findings raise questions about market efficiency and investor behaviour, and although
dividend-related anomalies have been documented in several markets, it remains unclear whether the
same patterns found in the U.S. can be generalised and found in other markets as well. Sweden is a
relevant market for such an extension, as several of its institutional features differ from the U.S. in ways
that could potentially influence trading behaviour around dividend events. That leads us to our first
research question: To investigate if we can find evidence of the Dividend Month Premium, or similar
phenomena, in the Swedish stock market.

Whether the Dividend Month Premium exists in Sweden is not widely tested yet, but replicating
Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) in the Swedish setting provides a valuable test of the external validity
of the dividend month premium. With the objective of examining how country-specific institutional
factors may shape dividend-related return patterns, we believe that the findings could also be relevant
for both Swedish investors and managers; particularly when choosing investments and designing
dividend policies, based on their strategies and primary objectives. That motivates our second research
question: If such an effect exists in Sweden, we want to examine if it differs from the findings in the U.S.
market and if so, how?

Provided that we observe any significant differences, the aim of this thesis is to further explore why, and
the natural first step is to establish the Swedish institutional setting. Firstly, the Swedish dividend cycle
is different. While the U.S. market is dominated by quarterly dividend payouts, most Swedish firms
follow the Nordic norm of paying dividends annually. The dividend season is usually around March to
May, in connection with annual general meetings. This often results in one larger dividend payment
rather than several smaller ones throughout the year (SEB Research, 2025). Thus, since dividend
ex-dates are highly concentrated in a short period, rather than dispersed quarterly, this may influence
whether a dividend month premium can arise.

                                       1
Secondly, the Swedish dividend tax system differs markedly from the U.S. In the U.S., dividends can be
classified as either qualified or ordinary, which affects the applicable tax rate (Vanguard, 2025). By
contrast, Sweden applies a flat 30 percent tax on dividends and also applies the 3:12 rules for most
closely held firms, which allow more favourable dividend taxation for closely held firms in certain cases
(Colleen, 2025). These differences may affect timing and investors’ incentives to trade around
dividends.

Thirdly, core differences relate to ownership structure and investor climate. The Swedish stock market
is highly concentrated in institutional ownership, where pension funds and investment companies
represent a significant share of total equity holdings (OECD, 2025). At the same time, Swedish
household participation is widespread and it is reported that retail investors generally maintain
long-horizon and low-turnover portfolios (Finansinspektionen, 2025). Moreover, despite dividends
being taxed at a flat 30 percent rate, the widely used ISK taxes capital gains indirectly through a low
annual wealth tax (Skatteverket, 2025), potentially reducing incentives for chasing dividends and
short-term trading due to tax-sensitivity.

Taken together, these institutional differences suggest that Swedish stocks may not necessarily behave
similarly as U.S. stocks around dividend events. In particular, it is reasonable to believe that the strong
interim build-up and subsequent reversal documented in the U.S. may be weaker or absent in Sweden.
This idea culminates into our third research question: Provided that differences emerge, what are likely
explanations? Could we attribute it to institutional differences, such as dividend cycles, tax and investor
clientele or to other market conditions.

   2. Literature Review

The key phenomenon that this thesis seeks to investigate is the Dividend Month Premium, which is
the primary finding of Hartzmark and Solomon (2013). Through an event study, they show that U.S.
stocks on average earn significantly higher abnormal returns in months when expected to issue
dividends. More interestingly, they observe that abnormal returns are not only limited to the
ex-dividend day but begin to build up between the announcement and the ex-day, even though no new
information is provided during this window.

The paper identifies a distinctive return pattern: a build-up during the interim period, a sizable ex-day
effect and a strong reversal afterwards. That suggests that investors start buying shares, pushing prices
upward until ex-day passes, then they reverse once investors’ positions are unwound. The authors
attribute this pattern to temporary price pressure, driven by dividend-seeking investors rather than risk
or information.

                                       2
To investigate this, we build on existing theories and previous work. Our starting point is the
traditional view of Miller and Modigliani (1961) who proposes the Dividend Irrelevance Theory,
arguing that in a frictionless and efficient market, dividend policy should not affect firm value or
expected returns. Investors should be indifferent between receiving dividends today or capital gains in
the future. Thus, any deviations from this benchmark such as predictable return patterns around
dividend events would therefore contradict market efficiency and propose that additional mechanisms
may influence investor behaviour.

Some of the most traditional explanations for these deviations are risk-based. Kalay and Loewenstein
(1985) holds that high returns around dividend announcements could simply reflect risk, arguing that
stock returns are more volatile on announcement days. This is supported by Savor and Wilson (2011)
who assert that firms’ returns become more correlated with macroeconomic risks on major
announcement days, thus explaining unusually high returns with higher systematic risk.

Other empirical studies provide information-based explanations, such as signaling theory and
announcement effects. For instance, Bhattacharya (1979) and Miller and Rock (1985) suggest that
firms use dividend changes to convey information about future earnings or cash flow prospects. Under
this view, abnormal returns around dividend announcements reflect the arrival of new valuable
information. Accordingly, Engelberg, McLean and Pontiff (2018) find that many return anomalies are
concentrated and stronger on days when firm-specific news are released, consistent with Savor and
Wilson (2011) arguing that firm returns are more correlated with macroeconomic risks during
announcement periods. They further suggest that high returns are simply investors being compensated
for bearing higher information risk.

However, Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) test if this holds for dividend announcements as well and
find that the dividend month premium builds up after the announcement, when no new information
is disclosed and volatility is not elevated. That makes pure risk explanations unlikely and further means
that signaling and information-based explanations cannot solely explain the price anomalies between
announcement and ex-day. Therefore, although providing a useful contrast they are unlikely to be the
primary mechanism behind the dividend month patterns examined in this thesis, shifting the focus
toward other mechanisms and explanations.

A well-documented one, also considered by Hartzmark and Solomon (2013), is the ex-dividend effect.
Ample empirical studies show that stock prices tend to fall less than the dividend amount on ex-day,
which in perfect markets should equal the dividend amount; thus resulting in return peaks
concentrated around ex-day. Elton and Gruber (1970) argue that investors care about the after-tax
returns of dividend compared to capital gains from selling the stock, making tax clientele and timing

                                       3
crucial. If a dividend is taxed more heavily than the capital gain from selling a stock, investors will likely
wait and buy a stock on the ex-day or after. In this way they avoid receiving dividends and tax
disadvantages, since buying a stock before ex-day entitles them to its dividends. This potentially
explains abnormal returns on the ex-day itself, but not fully explains the price drift before or after the
ex-day, which is central for the Dividend Month Premium.

Other researchers point towards more non-fundamental drivers. Baker and Wurgler (2004) argue that
firms may cater to temporary investor demand for dividends and that dividend demand is driven by
factors such as investor preference and risk aversion which can influence prices and create price pressure
even without new information. They suggest that during times of economic uncertainty, dividends are
often viewed as a safe income. Other studies focus on seasonal effects and how broader seasonality can
be predicted and shape return patterns. For instance, Heston and Sadka (2008) finds evidence for a
calendar month effect; that some stocks consistently earn high returns in the same calendar month each
year, suggesting that returns in the current month could potentially be predicted using returns from
the corresponding month in previous years.

In addition, Lakonishok and Vermaelen (1986) show that if there is predictable timing of clustered
dividend payments, when most dividend payments are concentrated during a single dividend season, it
may create seasonal effects on return patterns around ex-dividend days. That may make it more difficult
to distinguish whether abnormal returns are caused by dividend-specific reasons, or simply by seasonal
return patterns. Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) did not find seasonal effects to explain the interim
period price drift in the U.S., potentially because of the spread of dividend payments, instead they
point towards a price pressure mechanism.

That moves us to their main explanation provided: temporary price pressure. Studies on price pressure
by Shleifer (1986) and Greenwood (2005) show that when investor demand shifts in a predictable way,
prices can temporarily be pushed away from fair value, despite no new information being disclosed.
That is consistent with Hartzmark and Solomon (2013), arguing that dividend-seeking investors start
buying shares between the announcement and ex-date, increasing the demand and pushing prices
upward during the interim period. This creates a short-term overpricing, but once the ex-day passes,
prices reverse. Price pressure therefore offers a demand-based explanation for short-term return
patterns around dividend events.

                                       4
To sum up this section, although dividend anomalies have been examined in several countries, evidence
of the Dividend Month Premium outside the U.S. is still limited. Sweden provides an interesting
context due to its distinct institutional features, including annual dividend payments concentrated in a
short spring season, its dividend tax structure and high share of long-horizon institutional investors.
These characteristics may influence whether the patterns documented by Hartzmark and Solomon
(2013) also appear in the Swedish market, which is what the following sections aim to explore.

   3. Methodology Overview and Data Gathering

We apply the same methodology as Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) to the Swedish market from 1st of
January 2009 to 31st of December 2019. We use those particular years since we look at general patterns
and want to capture “normal years”. This period excludes major events such as the 2008 Financial
Crisis and Covid-19, avoiding potential biases those might have imposed. The purpose is to study the
effect of predicted dividends on Swedish stock prices, by analysing abnormal returns around dividend
events, first monthly but later broken down into daily. We study the existence of the dividend month
premium in Sweden by comparing predicted dividend months to non-dividend months, as well as
comparing predicted dividend payers to non-predicted payers. Beyond identifying whether a dividend
month premium exists, we aim to understand why such a pattern may or may not appear.
Furthermore, we investigate whether we can observe evidence of any price pressure or an ex-day effect.

To make our results more robust, we also perform additional tests in table 5, 6 and 7. This part of the
empirical analysis does not consist of fully independent sections but rather serves as controlling tests on
the results we obtain from the former ones. Given that we find a dividend month premium or similar
phenomenon relating to abnormal returns, these sections aim to explore whether the abnormal returns
are truly dividend-related. We examine whether the abnormal returns follow the natural dividend cycle,
controlling for several dividend frequencies. Consequently, we explore if we can observe long-term
persistence in the anomalies or if the dividend month premium simply reflects short-term trading. We
then investigate if the abnormal returns may not be dividend-related but are rather influenced by
factors such as broader seasonal patterns or calendar effects, as suggested by Heston and Sadka (2008).

To perform this analysis, we construct our data universe, mirroring Hartzmark and Solomon (2013)
but using Swedish market data. We consider public stocks listed on Nasdaq OMX Stockholm and
include only active and primary listings. Although they excluded shares with price less than $5, we
choose to include all shares regardless of prices since the Swedish exchange is significantly smaller than
the U.S. exchange. Excluding small-sized shares risks removing a large proportion of our sample,
making it insufficient and biased.

                                       5
Our main data sources are LSEG Workspace and FinBas by the Swedish House of Finance. From
LSEG Workspace (2025) we retrieved our raw data for monthly returns and dividend event data; such
as dividend announcement date, ex-dividend date, currency, dividend gross amount and dividend
frequency. With regards to dividend payments, we include only ordinary cash dividends and focus on
recurring dividends; such as quarterly, semi annual and annual dividends. Mirroring Hartzmark and
Solomon (2013), we count dividends with no set of frequency as equivalent to the most frequent one,
in our case annual dividends (see appendix A). From FinBas (2025) we also obtained Kenneth Fama
French Standards Factors for the Swedish market, daily stock prices and company fundamentals; such
as market capitalization and book value. Complementary GDP-data for table 4 is retrieved from SCB
(2021).

   4. Empirical Analysis and Results

4.1. Predicted Dividend Months and Raw Return

To begin the analysis, we construct Table 1 in two steps generating two panels. We start by examining
whether Swedish stocks display higher average returns in months when expected to pay dividends,
shown in Panel A. Provided that they do, in Panel B we examine whether higher returns are truly
abnormal or simply reflect higher risk; which would be consistent with pure risk-based explanations
(Kalay and Loewenstein, 1985). These steps follow the logic of Hartzmark and Solomon (2013), and if
our findings are aligned with theirs, we expect stocks to earn significantly higher returns in dividend
months. Given that we observe higher returns in dividend months, in order to find evidence of a
non-risk-based dividend month premium, we expect to not find that those months also display higher
volatility.

For Panel A, we group the stocks based on when, number of months since, the last dividend was paid.
For each of the 12 monthly-sorted groups the average raw return and standard deviation is computed.
This allows us to examine the risk-return tradeoff for each month separately and identify whether
particular months, for instance dividend months, display notably higher returns in relation to its
volatility and compared to other months. We expect that our findings may deviate from Hartzmark
and Solomon (2013) because of Sweden’s annual dividend frequency, instead of quarterly.

                                       6
Table 1, Panel A: Raw Returns of current dividend, sorted by the timing since last dividend
This panel represents monthly average stock returns and standard deviation, sorted by the timing of past dividends from January 1st
2009 to December 31st 2019. It further represents raw return and standard deviation of each month, given how many months ago the
last dividend was done.

Panel A shows that stocks that paid their last dividends one month ago, on average, earn the lowest
return; slightly negative with a mean return of (-0.14%). The volatility in that month is low as well.
However, it is not the least volatile month since the standard deviation is 7.25 which is higher than
month eleven, having the lowest standard deviation of 7.15. Despite being least volatile, month eleven
has one of the highest mean returns of 2.64%, contradicting arguments of a pure risk-reward tradeoff.
In addition, if the pure risk-based explanations hold, we would expect stocks that paid dividends nine
months ago, earning the highest mean return of 3.2%, to also be significantly more risky than all the
other stocks. That is not fully the case. While they do have one of the highest standard deviations by
8.76, it is not significantly higher than the other groups and interestingly; stocks that paid their last
dividend six months ago also have the same standard deviation of 8.76 but only earn a mean return of
1.51%. Likewise, stocks that paid dividend three months ago are one of the most volatile, but still only
earn a mean return of 1.2%

                                       7
Overall, our results for Panel A show no evidence of any one-to-one-relationship between risk and
return, thus do not provide evidence for the risk-based arguments of Kalay and Loewenstein (1985),
and fail to conclude whether high returns are due to higher volatility. Moreover, a key difference from
Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) is that they find a prominent pattern of higher return and lower
volatility in the months 3, 6, 9, 12, those when dividends are expected to be paid; given quarterly
dividends. We would expect a clear return pattern in order to establish the existence of a dividend
month premium. Instead we fail to identify a consistent pattern of when return is high or volatility
low. Thus, we can not provide sufficient evidence for its existence.

On the other hand, we also can not provide evidence to support that it does not exist either. For
instance, it is reasonable to believe, if the dividend month premium does exist, that dividend frequency
could be a key factor behind the inconsistent return patterns for our sample. Since our dominating
frequency is annual rather than quarterly, our dividend months will reasonably not be the same as in
the U.S. which may also shape investor expectations. For instance, given that a premium does exist,
annual dividends could potentially make the effect weaker and thus result in more noise making it
more difficult to identify a clear pattern. If that holds true, it would partly explain our results. In order
to further examine whether a dividend premium, possibly weaker, may exist; we move on to the next
step which is shown in Panel B.

For Panel B, we mirror Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) and establish three categories: (1) companies
that are predicted to pay a dividend this month, (2) companies that have paid at least one dividend in
the past 12 months but are not predicted to pay this month and (3) all other companies that are not
predicted to pay dividend this month, regardless if they have historically paid. We work under the
                                                                                               1
assumption that dividend behaviour is predictable and thus all companies with regular past dividend
payments fall under (1) predictable dividend payers.

Continuing, we form two portfolios and the purpose is to make two comparisons. In the first portfolio
we compare predicted dividend payers only to companies that have historically paid dividends. It
consists of long predicted dividend payers (1) and short all other companies with at least one dividend
in the past 12 months, but not expected to pay this month (2). In the second portfolio we compare
predicted payers to all non-predicted players, including both past- and non-dividend paying
companies. The portfolio consists of long predicted payers (1) and short all other companies that are
not predicted to pay a dividend this month. The main purpose is to explore whether (1) predicted
dividend payers outperform the non-predicted dividend payers (2) and (3), since that would serve as
evidence for the existence of a dividend month premium.

1
 We predict the dividend will be paid in the current month only if a quarterly dividend was paid 3, 6, 9 or 12 months ago, if a semi-annual
dividend was paid 6 or 12 months ago; or if an annual dividend was paid 12 months ago.

                                       8
Table 1, Panel B: Returns and Portfolios based on Predicted Dividend Payment
This panel shows the time series returns of three categories: (1) Companies that are predicted to pay a dividend this month, (2) companies
that have paid at least one dividend in the past 12 months but are not predicted to pay this month and (3) all other companies that have
not paid dividend in the past 12 months. It also shows the average return and standard deviation of the two constructed portfolios. For
both the three categories and the two portfolios, the sharpe ratio is computed. The sharpe ratio equals the average return minus risk free
rate, divided by standard deviation of returns.

Panel B shows that when comparing the three different categories, (1) predicted dividend payers earn
the highest average returns of 2.39% but their returns are also most volatile with a standard deviation of
5.55. Looking at the others, (2) other past payers and (3) non-predicted payers, we see that the
argument of lower risk equals lower volatility in fact holds here. However, when instead looking at the
Sharpe ratio, (1) predicted dividend payers in fact have the highest Sharpe ratio. That potentially
provides some, although weak, evidence of an earnings premium.

Moving on to the portfolios. In the first portfolio, long in (1) predicted dividend payers and short in
(2) other past payers but non-predicted, the mean return is 0.78% which is significantly lower than any
of the three categories alone. However, the portfolio volatility does not follow the same pattern,
resulting in a notably lower Sharpe ratio of 0.17. Based on the Sharpe ratios we find evidential support
indicating that a dividend month premium may exist, since the both categories of dividend payers, (1)
and (2), have the highest Sharpe ratios; and mixing the predicted dividend payers in portfolios lowers
the Sharpe ratio. However, Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) found significantly larger differences in the
U.S., particularly that (3) non-predicted payers and the second portfolio had markedly higher
volatilities than both (1) and (2). This suggests that portfolios restricted to dividend-paying firms
exhibit somewhat better risk-adjusted performance.

Overall, we find abnormal returns and some supporting evidence of a dividend month premium exists
in Sweden. However, we believe that the effect is notably weaker and less significant relative to the U.S.
Although risk-return-trade-off provides useful intuition, it does not fully control for multiple sources
of systematic risk. This will be done in the next section, using a more complex regression model.

                                       9
4.2. Risk Adjusted Returns in Dividend Months

In this section we extend our analysis, to evaluate whether the argument of Savor and Wilson (2011)
holds, that the observed abnormal returns in dividend months arise because of systematic risk. To test
this, we construct Table 2. The data used in the regressions throughout Table 2 are Swedish monthly
stock data from January 2009 to December 2019 listed on Nasdaq Stockholm. We build three panels,
each aim to add another layer of evidence and show how predicted dividend paying stocks perform
relative to standard models. Starting with Panel A. Long and short equally weighted portfolios of
Swedish monthly stock returns are formed based on predicted dividend payment. To be included in
the long portfolio as a predicted payer, the firm must have paid either a quarterly dividend 3, 6, 9 or 12
months ago, a semi-annual dividend 6 or 12 months ago or an annual dividend 12 months ago.

In the short portfolios, all firms not included in the long portfolio, i.e. not predicted to pay this month,
are included in all other companies. Included in all other past dividend payers, are firms that have paid a
dividend in the past 12 months but are not predicted to pay this month. Dividend 1, 4, 7, 10 months
ago, includes companies with a dividend paid in any of those months; the month after a predicted
dividend. Those are not included in the long portfolio, i.e. not predicted to pay this month either.

We also construct difference portfolios, having a long position in the portfolio consisting of predicted
dividend payers and a short position in each of the other short portfolios. The purpose is to
demonstrate the difference between long and each of the short portfolios.

Each of the portfolios are then regressed on the Fama French four factors. Panel A presents the alphas,
representing abnormal returns, of stocks after regression. For this panel regression, and majority of
subsequent ones, we follow Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) and use the equation for the Fama French
Carhartt Four Factor Model (FF4), given by:

                                                                                                              (1)

Ri denotes the return of the individual stock and Rf denotes the risk-free rate. Thus (Ri - Rf) shows expected abnormal return and (Ri -
Rf) market premium. The other factors represent market risk (Mkt - rf), size (SMB), value (HML) and momentum (UMD). Alpha
captures the abnormal return not explained by any of the other risk factors. Epsylon is the residual.

                                      10
Table 2, Panel A: Four Factor Alphas for Portfolios, based on Predicted Dividends
The panel presents the intercepts of the Fama French Four Factor regression on each equally weighted portfolio and the difference of long
and short portfolios. The long portfolio includes stocks that are predicted to pay a dividend this month. The short portfolios include
non-predicted payers “all other companies”, other past dividend payers but not predicted to pay now, and companies that have paid at
least one dividend 1, 4, 7 or 10 months ago. The top number shows coefficients, the lower number in parenthesis shows t-test statistics
and *, ** and *** shows statistical significance of 10%, 5% and 1% respectively.

The first row in Panel A represents a portfolio only consisting of solely predicted dividend payers. It
shows that, after controlling for Fama French four factors, predicted dividend payers are alpha-positive
and generate significant abnormal returns of 1.52% with a t-statistic of 3.42. Their abnormal returns
are the highest compared to the other portfolios, suggesting that predicted dividend payers
outperforms standard factors and performs better than the other groups. This further provides
statistical evidence that there exists a dividend monthly premium in Sweden.

The second row represents the comparison of predicted dividend payers to the three different short
portfolios (the other three categories). The short portfolios all earn less abnormal returns than the long
one, but interestingly, they all show positive and statistically significant alphas; ranging from 0.337% to
0.534%. Our results are inconsistent with Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) who found negative alphas
in two of the short portfolios, both for all other non-predicted payers and when dividend was paid 1, 4,
7 or 10 months ago. Since they define those to be months immediately after an anticipated dividend,
they interpret the negative alphas as a result of a temporary price pressure that reverses, caused by
dividend-seeking investors, as suggested by Shleifer (1986) and Greenwood (2005). Once investors
unwind their positions, it causes negative returns right after the dividend has been paid.

The third row represents the difference between long and short portfolios. Each yields positive and
significant alphas of 0.986%, 1.029% and 1.183% respectively. Our results display positive returns for all
portfolios but higher for predicted dividend payers in dividend months, further supporting that a
dividend month premium does exist and is not simply a risk-based anomaly.

                                      11
Although we can not fully establish the reason for the frictions found earlier, for instance why we find
only positive returns for our short portfolios. However, it is consistent with our previous and new
findings. Given that a return premium exists, our non-predicted dividend paying stocks are reasonably
expected to perform worse than our predicted dividend payers, which they do. However, given that the
effect is weaker in Sweden compared to the U.S., the difference between predicted and non-predicted
stocks would not have to be large enough to yield negative alphas either. Interestingly, this indicates
that the temporary price pressure may not be the key driver in Sweden, contrary to the U.S. findings by
Hartzmark and Solomon (2013).

Given that a monthly dividend premium does seem to exist and our previous tests have pointed
towards it not being due to systematic risk, we want to make our results more robust. Therefore, for
Panel B, we will perform an additional comparative test for two of the other short portfolios; for both
all other companies and for all other past dividend payers. They will, once again, be compared to
predicted dividend payers but this time using these regression models to examine if the results differ. To
do this, we regress the monthly returns in our Swedish sample on three different regression models:
CAPM, FF3 and FF4.

Table 2, Panel B: CAPM, FF3 and Factor Loadings from FF4—All other Companies
This panel presents the intercepts for regression on CAPM model controlling for excess market return, three factor regression controlling
for excess market returns, SMB and HML. Fama French four factor regression controlling for excess market return, size, value and
momentum. The monthly returns are regressed on long predicted dividends and short all other companies.

Panel B shows that the abnormal returns for the long portfolio are similar under different regression
models. The alphas for predicted dividend are 1.473%, 1,532% and 1.520% and the alphas for short all
other companies are 0.645%, 0.569% and 0.560% under CAPM, FF3 and FF4 model respectively.
When constructing a portfolio with predicted dividend on the long leg and all other companies in the
short leg, the alphas remain positive and statistically significant, indicating that predicted dividends
outperform other firms on a risk-adjusted basis. However, the persistence of positive alpha in this
portfolio suggests that the abnormal return may be due to other risk-factors rather than solely
dependent on dividend driven anomaly.

                                      12
The factor loading in this portfolio is shown to be statistically significant and negative on the market-
and size-factor of (-0.218) and (-0.344) respectively, while the exposures to value and momentum are
close to zero and also statistically insignificant. These loadings indicate that the strategy tends to load
on large and low beta firms, which historically would predict lower, not higher return. Despite this, the
portfolio produces a positive and statistically significant alpha of nearly 1% per month across all model
specifications. This result suggests that the abnormal return cannot be explained by standard risk
factors. This suggests that the anomalies may be driven by other mechanisms, potentially associated
with dividend related effects.

Table 2, Panel C: CAPM, FF3 and Factor Loadings from FF4—All other Past Dividend Payers
Panel C presents nearly the same parameters as panel B. The only difference is that this has long predicted dividends and short all other
past dividend payers.

The result of panel C also indicates positive alphas for both long predicted dividend and short other
past dividend payers. None of the factor loadings in this portfolio is statistically significant, suggesting
that the abnormal return in this panel cannot be totally explained by the common systematic risk
factors. Taken together, the result aligns with our finding in panel B, suggesting that the positive
abnormal return may plausibly arise from dividend related dynamics. The subsequent analysis will
deepen our understanding of the underlying dynamics.

It is worth noting since replicating Hartzmark and Solomon (2013), is that they also included a
liquidity factor in this table and subsequent ones, which we choose to exclude in its entirety. This
because they did not find significant results more than that it simply reinforces existing effects.
Therefore, we do not expect that the results of including it will alter our main analysis and thus it does
not provide sufficient contribution to be included.

                                      13
4.3. Daily Abnormal Returns around Dividend Months

Thus far, our results suggest that the abnormal returns are not purely driven by risk but that there
exists some abnormal return in Sweden when dividends are expected to be paid when compared with
other firms with no anticipated dividend. However, the monthly patterns are less significant and more
inconsistent. Thus, the effect of this premium appears to be significantly weaker compared to the U.S.
setting, potentially connected to Sweden’s annual, rather than quarterly, dividend frequency.

One of the more notable findings however, appears in Table 2, Panel A. Since we have positive alphas
the month immediately after the predicted dividend, we lack evidential support for a reversal of price
pressure. It could potentially also mean that there may in fact not have existed any price pressure to
begin with. If any of the two holds true, that we either lack a price reversal afterwards or simply a price
pressure to begin with, it would stand in contrast to the key findings Hartzmark and Solomon (2013).
This since they establish temporary price pressure to be the main driver behind the dividend month
premium in the U.S.

In order to investigate the existence of temporary price pressure, we will decompose the dividend
month premium into daily pieces. This allows us to focus on the abnormal returns around dividend
cycles and identify when the abnormal returns occur and are most prominent.

Table 3 allows us to measure average abnormal returns of dividend paying firms at each point in the
dividend cycle, and further examine how the daily characteristic-adjusted returns vary around the
dividend event. Based on the results, we can observe whether there is a price pressure effect (build up)
from announcement day leading up to the ex-day or if the price effects are solely concentrated around
the ex-day itself. If that would be the case, it would be consistent with the ex-dividend effect and
potentially make tax-related explanations proposed by Elton and Gruber (1970) more relevant.

For this section of the analysis we use daily closing prices from Finbas (2025) for our entire sample
period. To simplify, we follow Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) and only include our most dominant
dividend frequency; annual dividend paying firms. Then we define five event windows, each window
corresponding to an event period or date connected to the dividend payment. We will deviate slightly
from Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) by excluding both liquidity factor and trading volume as neither
holds practical relevance for our main analysis.

                                      14
We start by defining our five event windows: (1) the actual announcement day, (2) the predicted
announcement day, (3) the interim period, (4) the ex-day itself, and (5) the 40-day post-ex-day period.
The predicted announcement day is defined as per Hartzmark and Solomon (2013), thus defined as 63
trading days after the previous announcement date. The interim period is defined as one day after the
announcement date until one day before ex-day. Then we also have an additional variable in the list:
the announcement to ex-day window. That is a cumulative window, capturing the daily abnormal
returns that have accumulated during the entire interim period.

Since no new information is expected to arrive during that period, we expect no abnormal returns. Any
abnormal returns could thus indicate a price pressure due to increased demand from dividend-seeking
investors buying the stock before ex-day; in order to capture the dividend.

The next step is computing daily characteristics-adjusted returns for each of the five windows, using
the following equation (2):

                                                                                                    (2)

ARi,t denotes daily characteristic-adjusted abnormal returns. We compute daily returns and subtract returns of a matched portfolio,
               match
denoted Rt     .

The matched portfolios used in this equation are formed by sorting stocks into quintiles based on
                                   2
market capitalization, B/M ratio and momentum. This is done to only capture the “abnormal part”,
since adjusting each stock’s return for behaviours considered normal for similar firms.

Consequently, the characteristics-adjusted abnormal returns are summed up for each event window to
compute cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) using the following equation (3):

                                                                                                    (3)

CARi(t1t2) denotes cumulative abnormal returns, all daily characteristic-adjusted returns (ARi,t ) during each window.

2
 Calculated as market capitalization divided by book value of equity

                                      15
Table 3: Daily Abnormal Returns around Windows in Dividend Cycle
This table presents daily characteristic-adjusted abnormal returns across the dividend cycle for Swedish firms. Daily abnormal return is
calculated as the stock’s actual return, minus the return of a matched portfolio with similar size, value and momentum characteristics. We
divide the dividend cycle into 5 event windows and 1 additional cumulative window; and compute CARs in each window: the
announcement day, predicted announcement day, the interim period, the ex-day itself, the cumulative announcement to ex-day window, and
the 40-day post-ex-day period. A predicted announcement day 63 days after its previous announcement date. Announcement to ex-day is a
combined window measuring cumulative returns between announcement date until ex-day. A more visual graph of the return patterns
can be found in Appendix B. The top number shows coefficients, the lower number in parenthesis shows t-test statistics and *, ** and ***
shows statistical significance of 10%, 5% and 1% respectively.

Table 3 shows a positive CAR on the announcement day, implying that Swedish dividend paying firms
earn on average positive abnormal returns of 0.467%. That would potentially support
information-based announcement effects (Engelberg, McLean and Pontiff, 2018; Miller and Rock,
1985). We observe negative CARs both during the interim period but then it has a positive peak on the
ex-day, only to experience a smaller reversal 40 days afterwards. The cumulative window has seemingly
positive CAR, indicating a temporary buying pressure during interim. On the other hand, the former
negative CARs contradicts the idea of price pressure since we would expect a build-up of increased
CAR as we approach ex-day; which is now not the case.

Overall, most of our results are statistically insignificant, suggesting that the positive accumulated
returns are merely a reflection of the ex-day peak; and none of those results are sufficient enough to
draw conclusions based on. We believe the statistical insignificance to either be due to weak effects,
unclear patterns or because Sweden is a significantly smaller sample than the U.S. The only significant
results we obtain are for the ex-day and also the 40-days after ex-day. The CAR on ex-day shows that
firms on average earn positive abnormal returns of 0.698%, which is both high and statistically
significant at a 1% level. This provides evidence of the existence of an ex-day effect rather than

                                      16
temporary price pressure. This is further supported by our 40 days post ex-day window. Although
showing a slightly negative CAR of (-0.04%), the low magnitude suggests that it only reflects a mild
price reversal after the ex-day price jump.

If there would exist a price pressure ahead of ex-day, we would expect a significantly larger reversal. For
instance, Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) shows a large negative CAR of (-0.719%). Contrary, they
report a smaller ex-day return of 0.262%, yet statistically significant. Our ex-day effect is substantially
larger. While U.S. investors are suggested to be dividend-seeking, trading before ex-day to capture
dividends, Swedish investors evidently do not show similar behaviours. Consistent with Elton and
Gruber (1970) this could be due to the different tax systems and investor clientele that Sweden
exhibits, compared to the U.S. As established, Sweden applies the 3:12 rules to certain companies and
many investors have ISK-accounts, both allowing more favorable dividend taxation. That would
reasonably give them more incentive to chase dividends to obtain the tax advantages and hence create
buyer pressure. However, the return patterns we observe display the opposite. One underlying reason
could be the standard 30 percent flat rate, applied to firms not qualifying for the 3:12 taxation rules or
investors not having ISK accounts. That could make them trade on ex-day or after, to avoid receiving
the dividends and its associated tax-disadvantages. That could potentially explain the price jump on
ex-day.

Furthermore, since annual dividends are generally larger in size, an unfavorable dividend tax will be
heavier and give them more incentive to avoid it. Another plausible explanation is that having an
annual dividend, in contrast to a more frequent quarterly dividend, may lower investors incentive to
employ dividend-chasing strategies. This pattern could also be explained by the investor clientele.
Swedish investor norms are more long term horizon, making them less inclined to exhibit short-term
dividend chasing behaviours.

Concluding this section, Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) find a clear and significant price build-up
during interim, with steadily increasing return peaking on the ex-day and with a strong reversal
afterwards. Their results thus provide strong evidence for temporary price pressure around dividend
events. However, our findings are inconsistent with theirs.

According to our results, the sample returns do not display a build-up from announcement to ex-day
but rather the opposite. Furthermore, the results until ex-day are all statistically insignificant as the
only statistically significant abnormal returns are concentrated entirely on the ex-day. It is then
followed by a small reversal 40 days afterwards, but not large enough to serve as evidence for reversed
price pressure. Thus, we do not find evidential support for temporary price pressure, caused by
dividend-seeking investors to be the key driver of the dividend month premium in Sweden. We do

                                      17
however find evidence for an ex-day effect, potentially due to different tax clienteles. There could also
be other determining factors causing demand shifts, such as macroeconomic factors. We will
investigate this in the following section.

4.4. Dividend Month Premium Dependent on Dividend Demand and Economic Uncertainty

In this section investigate whether dividend month premium varies with demand for dividend and
since we cannot directly observe demand, we will measure it across different broader economic
conditions. As Baker and Wurgler (2004) suggests, dividends are often viewed as a safe and guaranteed
income, and thus attractive during periods of economic uncertainty. Therefore, we would expect the
dividend premium to become stronger during these periods, as demand for dividend ought to increase
if investors have preferences for income and safety.

To examine this, we will measure economic uncertainty with two variables; market volatility and state
of economy. Furthermore, if investors desire dividends for the aforementioned reasons, they likely have
a greater preference for companies with higher dividend yield.

To test this we will construct Table 4. It builds directly on the event windows and abnormal return
patterns already obtained in Table 3, however excluding predicted announcement day as simply being a
check in Table 3. Since it does not relate to any trading, information disclosure or direct investor
behaviour it is irrelevant in Table 4; which mainly aims to understand whether certain variables amplify
or weaken the trading effect. Table 3 shows us when abnormal returns occur, while table 4 tells us how
they vary with the demand; whether we observe higher abnormal returns, thus stronger dividend
demand during economically uncertain times. If it holds true that the dividend month premium is
driven by price pressure and dividend-seeking investors’ demand, we expect stronger abnormal returns
when our demand is considered high.

In order to look at different demand parameters we will run three simple regressions to build three
separate panels. From Table 3 we get our dependent variable, our characteristics-adjusted daily
abnormal returns in each of the five windows. We will regress it on each of our three explanatory
variables (IV); dividend yield, recession dummy and volatility proxy (market volatility). The intercepts
are not of economic interest in this context and are therefore not interpreted. Our focus is on the
explanatory variables and their ability to explain the abnormal returns around dividend events.

                                      18
Table 4, Panel A: Average Daily Abnormal Returns regressed on Dividend Yield
This panel presents the characteristics-adjusted abnormal returns in each window regressed on the explanatory variable dividend yield,
where dividend yield is a valuation-based payout proxy. It is calculated based on our SizeBM file as: (book value/market value), and since
reported annually they are averaged across all firms in each calendar year. The five windows are the announcement day, the interim period,
the ex-day itself, the 40-day post-ex-day period and the cumulative announcement to the ex-day window. This panel also presents the effect
                                                                 2
dividend yield has on abnormal returns in each window, and the R  parameter representing the explanatory of dividend yield on
abnormal returns. The top number shows coefficients, the lower number in parenthesis shows t-test statistics and *, ** and *** shows
statistical significance of 10%, 5% and 1% respectively.

The results from Panel A do not display any clear pattern across the different event windows. The
coefficients for announcement day, interim and the cumulative window are negative while the others
                                                                                                 3
are positive. However, although a few coefficients are weakly significant , the inconsistent signs and
magnitude makes it difficult to interpret any pattern as proof of a concrete effect. The magnitudes are
difficult to interpret as they may be due to the construction of our dividend yield as a book-to-market
proxy, in absence of official free-to-access dividend yield data.

Overall, we cannot find any strong evidence pointing to a systematic relation between a firm's dividend
yield and its abnormal returns in dividend months. Thus, the Swedish dividend premium does not
appear to be determined by dividend yield, contrary to Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) who find
dividend yield to partly explain the U.S. dividend premium. This is however consistent with our
previous results, pointing towards the absence of price pressure. If it would be driven by investors who
seek out stocks with higher dividend yield, we would expect increased buying pressure, as a result of
higher dividend demand, which we can not observe. This is potentially attributed to institutional
differences such as Sweden’s annual dividend, making dividend yield more irrelevant and short-horizon
return behaviour less attractive.

3
  Only at a 10% significance level

                                      19
Table 4, Panel B: Average Daily Abnormal Returns regressed on Recessions (Dummy)
This panel presents the characteristics-adjusted abnormal returns in each window regressed on the dummy variable recessions, where we
identify all month with negative GDP-growth as the economy being in recession. We assign the recession months with 1 and otherwise 0.
The five windows are the announcement day, the interim, the ex-day, the 40-day after ex-day and the cumulative announcement to the
                                                                                                             2
ex-day window. This panel also presents the effect recessions have on abnormal returns in each window, and the R represents the
explanatory of recessions on abnormal returns. The top number shows coefficients, the lower number in parenthesis shows t-test statistics
and *, ** and *** shows statistical significance of 10%, 5% and 1% respectively.

The results from Panel B indicate that the recession dummy does not have much explanatory power for
                                                                    2
abnormal returns around dividend events. Most R -values are close to zero across all windows, slightly
higher for announcement day and ex-day, but overall the coefficients for recessions are statistically
insignificant. This suggests that abnormal returns during dividend months in Sweden behave similarly
regardless of the state of economy.

Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) find limited evidence that recessions strengthen the U.S. dividend
month premium, but in our case the relationship is even weaker and essentially absent. This further
fails to provide evidence that firm returns during announcement periods are more correlated with
macroeconomic risks (Savor and Wilson, 2011). Although dividend may be viewed as a safer income,
this provides supporting evidence that the patterns documented in Table 3 do not appear to be driven
by demand shifts originating from broader macroeconomic conditions.

                                      20
Table 4, Panel C: Average Daily Abnormal Returns regressed on Volatility Index (VIX/10)
This panel presents the characteristics-adjusted abnormal returns in each window regressed monthly volatility index. Since Sweden does
not have a VIX we construct a Swedish equal-weighted market index from our daily stock prices. It is converted to a daily return series,
calculating a 30-day rolling standard deviation of the market volatility. To obtain a monthly volatility index, we average this within each
month. It is scaled by dividing by 10, mirroring Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) and finally merged with the daily abnormal returns by
each month. The five windows are the announcement day, the interim period, the ex-day itself, the 40-day post-ex-day period and the
cumulative announcement to the ex-day window. This panel also presents the effect VIX has on abnormal returns in each window, and the
  2
R parameter representing the explanatory power of market volatility on abnormal returns. The top number shows coefficients, the lower
number in parenthesis shows t-test statistics and *, ** and *** shows statistical significance of 10%, 5% and 1% respectively.

Panel C shows that market volatility does not appear to explain abnormal returns around dividend
events in Sweden. Across all windows, the VIX/10-coefficient is small in magnitude and statistically
insignificant. This indicates that months with higher or lower market volatility do not systematically
affect the abnormal return patterns documented earlier.

Our results stand in contrast to Hartzmark and Solomon (2013), who find that volatility plays a more
meaningful role in the U.S. setting, amplifying certain return patterns around dividend events. The
absence of such effects in Sweden is consistent with our earlier broader findings; that the Swedish
dividend premium is comparably weaker and more concentrated around the ex-day itself, thus showing
limited signs of temporary price pressure to begin with. Since the underlying dividend premium itself
is smaller, there is naturally less dynamic for volatility to influence.

Overall, neither of our three explanatory variables dividend yield, recessions and market volatility seem
to predict our abnormal returns during the dividend cycle; indicating that shifts in these demand
parameters do not significantly amplify the returns patterns found in Table 3. This further suggests
that Sweden does not exhibit the price-pressure mechanism found in the U.S. Instead, the Swedish
pattern appears consistent with tax-driven or mechanical trading effects occurring specifically on the
ex-dividend day.

                                      21
4.5. Return sorted by Dividend Frequency

We began our analysis by looking at raw monthly return, conditional on the month when dividend was
expected. We could not find a clear pattern in those firms with anticipated dividends peaks in that
month. That approach lacks robustness as we only considered raw return and we did not consider the
differences in dividend frequency across firms. Given that annual dividends constitute the majority of
the observations, merging the different dividend frequencies may distort the return pattern. Moreover,
we examine abnormal returns in months with anticipated dividends and how the magnitude of returns
may vary depending on different frequencies. This allows us to examine if our abnormal returns follow
the natural dividend cycles, since that would provide evidence that the abnormal returns are a
premium resulting from dividends. If our results are consistent with Hartzmark and Solomon, we
should expect to see peaks in months 3, 6, 9 and 12 for quarterly dividend payers, months 6 and 12 for
semi-annual and month 12 for annual payers.

To address this we move to Table 5, in which we construct an equally-weighted portfolio which are
long predicted dividend payers, and short firms with no predicted dividend. We then regress the
portfolio’s excess return on the Fama French Carhartt four factors.

Table 5: Abnormal Returns by Dividend Frequency
This table presents the intercept of Fama French four factor regression on our Swedish sample of. They are sorted based on the timing of
past dividends, combined with the different dividend frequency types. Dividend types are classified as: quarterly, semi-annual or annual
dividends. A stock is classified as unknown frequency if it pays dividend but the frequency does not fall under any of the other three.

                                      22
Table 5 shows that all returns are negative and statistically significant in one month since the last
dividend regardless of dividend frequency. This is consistent with the post dividend price reversal due
to the decrease in investor’s demand after the ex dividend date as shown in Hartzmark and Solomon
(2013), where stock price declines following ex-dividend date. The observation of quarterly dividends
has shown that the returns peak at 3, 5, and 9 months since the last dividend, annual dividend payers
exhibit a return peak at 9 months since last dividend, significant at a 10% level and semi-annual
dividend peaks at 7 months. However, Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) find a clear pattern of the
dividend month premium, showing that the returns peak precisely on months when dividends are
expected; at 3, 6, 9 and 12 months since the last dividend.

Contrary to their findings, our results do not exhibit a clear pattern of high abnormal return in months
with predicted dividend, providing little evidence of a monthly dividend premium. Even after
controlling for the standard Fama French Carhartt four factor, the absence of a clear pattern on
dividend month persists. The findings in this table are consistent with our earlier observation in Table
1, Panel A; where the raw return analysis also provides no indication of systematically higher returns in
dividend months.

The weaker and less significant effect of abnormal return around dividend month in Sweden compared
to the U.S. is plausibly stemming from the institutional differences, further affecting investors
behavior. Annual dividend frequency dominates the Swedish market, limiting the incentive for chasing
dividends. Moreover, most Swedish investors adopt a long-term investment style, and may perceive the
short term trading around dividend date to be less appealing.

4.6. Long Term Dividend Effect

Although our earlier results reveal a weak pattern of dividend month effect, we also examine whether
any observable effect persists long-term. In this section we examine return over a nine-year horizon
based on the timing of the last dividend. We follow the methodology of Hartzmark and Solomon
(2013) and test whether the high return in predicted dividend month continues to hold even when the
dividend timing signal is shifted forward in time.

To do this we construct Table 6, where we form an equally-weighted portfolio and the monthly return
of each portfolio is regressed on the Fama French Carhartt four factor. In the long leg of the portfolio,
we sort stock returns on predicted dividend payment and later add lags up to 9 years. For instance, a
one year lag for a quarterly dividend corresponds to when they paid a dividend 15, 18, 21 or 24 months
ago, while a two year lag corresponds to firms that paid dividend 27, 30, 33 and 36 months ago. The
same logic applies to all categories of dividend frequency and to each subsequent lag year. In the short
leg of the portfolio, we include stocks with no predicted dividends in the same lagged year window.

                                      23
Table 6: Long-Term Persistence of Dividend Month Premium
This table presents the intercept from Fama French four factors regressed on monthly return of an equal-weighted portfolio. For each lag
horizon, the long portfolio consists of predicted dividend payers and the short portfolio consists of firms without predicted dividend.
The top number shows coefficients, the lower number in parenthesis shows t-test statistics and *, ** and *** shows statistical significance
of 10%, 5% and 1% respectively.

Table 6 shows that the intercepts, although earning returns fluctuating widely between positive and
negative, all lack statistical significance across the lagged horizons. This indicates that there is no
evidence of significant long-term persistence of the dividend month premium across observation years.

Furthermore, we do not find any recurring positive significance alpha Across the 9 year lag horizon that
would indicate any abnormal returns in dividend month to reappear in subsequent years. The absence
of long-term persistence we find is consistent with Hartzmark and Solomon (2013), although weaker
and less significant. Still it indicates that any dividend premium in Sweden reflects short-term trading
rather than long-term effects on stock prices or long-lasting changes in fundamental values.

4.7. Seasonality and Calendar Effects

Lastly, we want to investigate whether the positive abnormal returns are dividend-driven or if our
observed return patterns are rather shaped by a broader seasonality. Heston and Sadka (2008) propose
the existence of a calendar month effect, implying that some stocks earn higher returns every year. To

                                      24
do this we construct Table 7, to examine whether the dividend month premium is stronger in certain
calendar months. We build an equal-weighted portfolio of predicted dividend payers and all other past
payers. Then we compute the return difference to examine how well predicted dividend payers perform
relative to the non-predicted payers. Since we already know from previous analysis that they outform,
we investigate whether the positive abnormal returns are concentrated in any specific calendar month.
Such a seasonal pattern would have months that consistently earn either high or low returns, creating a
predictable pattern with anomalies in particular months, not possible to attribute to other factors such
as temporary price pressure.

Table 7: Dividend Month Premium by Calendar Months
This table presents the intercept from the Fama French four factor regression of Swedish monthly stock returns sorted on predicted
dividend payment on different calendar months. The monthly stock returns are regressed on excess market return, SMB, HML and
UMD. Predicted dividends are stocks that have quarterly dividend frequency that paid dividend 3, 6, 9 or 12 months ago, semi-annual
that paid dividends 6 or 12 months and an annual that paid dividend 12 months ago. ‘‘All other past dividend payers’’ includes companies
that paid a dividend in the past 12 months but are not predicted to pay a dividend this month based on the above formula. The intercept
presented in the tables are the abnormal returns to the different portfolio long predicted dividend payers and short all other past dividend
payers that are not expected to pay dividend now. The top number is the intercept that presents the portfolio abnormal returns, the lower
number in parentheses is the t-statistic, and *, ** and *** indicates statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.

                                      25
Table 7 shows that most of our results are insignificant. However, two of our results stand out
markebly and are statistically significant on a 1% significance level; May and June. The positive
abnormal returns predicted dividend payers earn are strongly concentrated in May and June, with
1.641% and 1.029% respectively at a 1% significant level. While Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) found
that the returns are not concentrated around any particular month but simply due to price pressure,
our results are evidently stating the opposite. This disparity is likely explained by the difference in
dividend frequency as Sweden's market is dominated by annual dividends, while in the U.S.
predominantly pay quarterly dividends distributed throughout the year.

Therefore, although we cannot identify a clear calendar month effect throughout the year, as suggested
by Heston and Sadka (2008), we find strong evidence of seasonal effects; namely the Swedish dividend
season. Consistent with Lakonishok and Vermaelen (1986), Sweden’s return patterns seem to be
subject to seasonal effects. This is highly expected since Sweden exhibits clustered dividend payments,
since having one main dividend season which is concentrated around late March and mid-May. These
observed patterns provide strong evidence that dividend payers earn abnormal returns exactly during
the single dividend season.

   5. Conclusion

The main objective of this thesis was to investigate if the phenomenon Dividend Month Premium
found in the U.S. stock market can also arise in a notably different institutional setting, such as the
Swedish market. This holds practical relevance since comparing the two markets provides external
validity of the phenomenon, examining whether it is globally relevant or exclusively limited to the U.S.
institutional setting.

Answering our first research question, whether we can find evidence of the dividend month premium
or similar phenomena, our empirical analysis points towards a mild dividend related pattern. The
monthly return analysis indicates that predicted dividend payers tend to earn higher abnormal returns
compared to other groups during the month of expected dividend. This pattern remains consistent
even after adjusting for risk; both relative to the risk free rate risk in table 1, panel B and Fama French
Carhartt four factor mode in table 2. In addition, predicted dividend payers seem to also earn higher
abnormal returns, relative to other groups, even outside their predicted dividend months. This implies
that investor demand for dividends around predicted dividend months is not strong enough to raise
prices in a way that produces statistically significant abnormal returns. Consistent with the prior U.S.
study, our empirical result challenges the traditional risk-based explanation, proving that higher return

                                      26
in predicted dividend months is not driven by higher risk. Thus, although the effect is significantly
weaker, we do find supportive evidence that the dividend month premium does exist in Sweden as well.

However, addressing the second research question, our results point towards a notable disparity
between the U.S. and Sweden. Although finding dividend related patterns in Sweden, the magnitude
and consistency of our findings are not as prominent as the U.S. Inconsistent with Hartzmark and
Solomon (2013), we could not find evidence of any temporary price pressure from dividend-seeking
investors. As shown in Table 1, Panel A and Table 5, the finding lacks a clear pattern.

An interesting difference is also that while Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) identified a distinct pattern
in the U.S. with a significant build-up between announcement day all up until ex-day, followed by a
strong reversal afterwards, our analysis shows the opposite. Instead, based on our analysis of daily
characteristic-adjusted returns in Table 3, Sweden exhibits only a significant peak on the ex-days and a
slightly negative reversal in 40 days after the ex-days. The absence of a build-up and strong reversal,
together with the significant ex-day jump points towards an ex-day effect rather than serving as
evidence for a temporary price pressure. Another interesting finding is that contrary to the U.S., where
seasonal effects did not seem to exist, in Sweden we find significant abnormal returns in May and June.

That leads us to our third research question, to investigate likely explanations to these discrepancies. As
we anticipated, many results in our analysis point toward the institutional differences. For instance, we
attribute the abnormal returns in May and June to the fact that Sweden has one single dividend season,
concentrated around March to mid-May. That means that ex-day ought to occur around May and June
and the clustered dividend payments create the seasonal effect.

Another key difference is seemingly the dividend frequency. Sweden’s annual dividend may be a key
contributor to the weak dividend month premium we find, since both making short-horizon return
behaviour less attractive as well as giving investors less incentive to adopt dividend-chasing strategies.
That further relates to another key discrepancy, the investor- and tax clientele. Since Sweden has a
different tax clientele, we expect investor expectations and behaviours to adapt accordingly. For
instance, Swedish investors overall show less dividend-seeking and short-term trading behaviours, and
more tendencies to invest long-horizon.

To conclude, our study contributes by providing an empirical analysis of dividend related anomalies in
Sweden, a market where such price dynamics have not been widely examined. The weaker dividend
effect we observe in Sweden compared to the U.S. highlights the importance of institutional setting as
it affects and shapes investor behaviors.

                                      27
   6. References

Below, the sources are presented sorted in alphabetical order of the first mentioned author.

Baker, M., Wurgler, J., 2004. A Catering Theory of Dividends. Journal of Finance 59, 1125 - 1165.

Bhattacharya, Sudipto, 1979. Imperfect information, dividend policy, and "the bird in the hand"
fallacy. Bell Journal of Economics 10, 259 - 270.

Colleen, L., 2025. Taxes on dividends. Lilla Ekonomibyrån. Accessed on December 2, 2025. Available
at: https://lillaekonomibyran.se/en/resources/taxes/taxes-on-dividends/

Elton, E.J., Gruber, M.J., 1970. Marginal stockholder tax rates and the clientele effect. Review of
Economics and Statistics 52, 68 - 74.

Engelberg, J., McLean, R.D., Pontiff, J., 2017. Anomalies and news. Journal of Finance 73, 1971 -
2001.

Finansinspektionen, 2025. Rapport: Svenskarnas sparande. Published on March 24, 2025. Available at:
https://www.fi.se/contentassets/7a5700557b96482ea86c6c853854b979/svenskars-sparande.pdf

FinBas, 2025. Financial database provided by the Swedish House of Finance (SHoF).

Greenwood, R., 2005. Short- and long-term demand curves for stocks: theory and evidence on the
dynamics of arbitrage. Journal of Financial Economics 75, 607 - 649.

Hartzmark, S.M, Solomon, D.H, 2013. The dividend month premium. Journal of Financial
Economics 109, 640 - 660.

Heston, S.L., Sadka, R., 2008. Seasonality in the cross-section of stock returns. Journal of Financial
Economics 87, 418 - 445.

Kalay, A., Loewenstein, U., 1985. Predictable events and excess returns: The case of dividend
announcements. Journal of Financial Economics 14, 423 - 449.

                                      28
Lakonishok, J., Vermaelen, T., 1986. Tax-induced trading around ex-dividend days. Journal of
Financial Economics 16, 287 - 319.

LSEG Workspace, 2025. Financial market data platform. London Stock Exchange Group.

Miller, M.H., Modigliani, F., 1961. Dividend policy, growth, and the Valuation of Shares. Journal of
Business 34, 411 - 433

Miller, M.H., Rock, K., 1985. Dividend policy under asymmetric information. Journal of Finance 40,
1031 - 1051.

OECD (2025), The Swedish Equity Market: Institutional Framework and Trends, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/0640a75c-en

Savor, Pavel, and Mungo Wilson, 2011, Earnings announcements and systematic risk, unpublished
working paper, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania

SEB Research, 2025. Dividend season and updated krona forecasts. Published 19 March 2025.
https://research.sebgroup.com/macro-ficc/reports/59307

Shleifer, A., 1986. Do demand curves for stocks slope down? Journal of Finance 41, 579 - 590.
Skatteverket, 2025. Skatt på investeringssparkonto. Accessed November 22, 2025. Available at:
https://www.skatteverket.se/privat/skatter/vardepapper/investeringssparkontoisk

Statistiska centralbyrån, 2021. Monthly GDP indicator, May 2021. Accessed on October 6, 2025.
Available at:
https://www.scb.se/hitta-statistik/statistik-efter-amne/nationalrakenskaper/ovrigt/nationalrakenskape
r-ovrigt/pong/statistiknyhet/nationalrakenskaper-ovrigt-bnp-indikator-manad-maj-2021/

Vanguard, 2025. Taxes on dividend income. Accessed on December 1, 2025. Available at:
https://investor.vanguard.com/investor-resources-education/taxes/dividends?

                                      29
   7. Appendices

Appendix A: Distribution of Dividend Frequencies of our Swedish sample

Appendix B: Supporting Graph for Table 3

Appendix C: AI-appendix

Although our work is independently produced we have used ChatGPT as an AI-tool. It has been used
to control our R-codes, especially helpful when we encountered programming obstacles and errors,
but also served as an invaluable tool to help us improve our writing quality. We have for instance used
it to make our language slightly more academic and concise, to be better suited as a financial journal,
but also asked it to read parts of our thesis; in order to criticize, ask questions and thus point out weak
points and identify parts that were ambiguous and unclear for the reader. All outputs and ideas from
ChatGPT were screened critically, and final decisions are from our own.

                                      30