CONSUMER BEHAVIOR
AROUND SALIENT SWEDISH
MACROECONOMIC
ANNOUNCEMENTS

AN EMPIRICAL STUDY

SEBASTIAN CASAS-BONDE

EDVARD OXELSTRÖM

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2026
Salience and Macroeconomic Information: How Household Attention Influences Con-
sumption around unemployment and Interest Rate Announcements

Abstract:
        This paper investigates whether Swedish household consumption changes
        around salient macroeconomic announcements. Using transaction-based
       data from Statistics Sweden from 2019 to 2026, we study SCB unem-
        ployment rate announcements and Riksbank interest rate announcements.
        We proxy salience with Google Trends search intensity for arbetslöshet
        (unemployment) and ränta (interest rate), with which we construct six-
        month salience maxima and estimate event-studies and regression mod-
        els. Pooled estimates show that both announcement types are associated
       with changes in consumption within ±14 day event windows. Direc-
        tional tests isolating the most salient announcements show that announce-
        ments indicating falling unemployment are associated with consumption
        response, whereas rising unemployment and interest rate announcements
        show weaker associations. By comparison, fundamentals-based maxima
        for unemployment announcements, following Garmaise, Levi, and Lustig
        (2024), are negatively associated with consumption response. Our findings
        suggest that Google Trends may capture more active information search
        around positive labor-market news than around monetary policy news,
        while unemployment-rate-based maxima may capture passively processed,
        severe labor-market news.

Keywords:
        Finance; Behavioral Finance; Household Consumption; Consumption Dy-
       namics; Macroeconomic Announcements
Authors:
        Sebastian Casas-Bonde (26161)
        Edvard Oxelström (26099)
Tutor
  Paula Roth, Postdoc Fellow, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner
  Ramin Baghai, Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Sebastian Casas-Bonde and Edvard Oxelström, 2026

                                    1
                      I. Introduction

                                                                                     1
Herbert Simon argued that in an information-rich world, attention is scarce.  When
viewed at the household level, attention constraints may undermine assumptions in
standard consumer theory that households form rational expectations and smooth
consumption over time (Kimball, 1990; Ganong and Noel, 2019). Building on this,
household consumption may respond not only to fundamentals but also to whether
macroeconomic releases become salient enough to capture households’ limited atten-
tion. Therefore, in our paper we examine whether Swedish household consumption
responds to unemployment and interest rate announcements, and whether attention,
or salience, amplifies consumption responses around these announcements.
   Garmaise, Levi, and Lustig (2024) show that discretionary spending in the United
States falls after local unemployment rate announcements that report a 12-month
maximum unemployment rate. These findings suggest that unemployment announce-
ments near local peaks (near-max), and announcements initially reported as record
highs but later revised away (false-max), are both followed by a decrease in discre-
tionary spending. They interpret these results as evidence that the salience of un-
employment news affects discretionary spending. This motivates our use of salience
as a potential channel through which macroeconomic information may affect Swedish
household consumption.
   Less is known about how continuous attention measures relate to household con-
sumption responses around different types of macroeconomic announcements. In
light of this we make four key contributions. First, we change the setting to Sweden,
where a large share of households have variable-rate mortgages. Second, we investi-
gate both interest rate announcements from the Riksbank and unemployment rate
announcements from Statistics Sweden (SCB) to compare consumption around two
macroeconomic topics. Third, inspired by Da, Engelberg, and Gao (2011), we use
Google Trends search intensity as a proxy for household attention and interact it
with both types of macroeconomic announcements to investigate whether continuous
attention is associated with stronger consumption responses around announcements.
Fourth, we test whether consumption response varies by announcement direction,
separating unemployment announcements and interest rate announcements by sign.
We investigate this through two research questions:

   1. Does Swedish household consumption change around unemployment and inter-
     est rate announcements?

   2. Does salience amplify consumption response around announcements, and is re-
      sponse state-dependent and symmetric across directions?

   Our research questions are interesting and policy-relevant as household consump-
tion is a major driver of economic activity and household welfare. Short-run spending
response around unemployment and interest rate announcements can therefore affect
both the economy and household well-being. Sweden is a useful environment for ex-
amining household consumption response since Swedish households are, on average,

   1
    In his famous essay Designing Organizations for an Information-Rich World, see Simon (1971)

                                    2
                                                                             2
highly leveraged and a large share hold variable-rate mortgages . This may increase
household sensitivity to interest rate announcements compared to other countries.
   Our sample data consist of years 2019 to 2026, a period that includes unemploy-
ment shocks, inflation, and Riksbank rate hikes following the Covid-19 pandemic.
The dependent variable consists of the transaction-based daily Swedish household
consumption index from SCB. Independent variables consist of unemployment statis-
tics release dates from SCB, and interest rate meeting dates from the Riksbank.
Inspired by Da et al. (2011), we use Google Trends search frequency to construct a
salience proxy by averaging daily Google Trends search intensity for the keywords
arbetslöshet (unemployment) and ränta (interest rate) over a ±7-day window around
each announcement date. We identify especially salient unemployment rate and in-
terest rate announcements by whether they reach a six-month Google Trends search
intensity maximum for respective keywords. We also identify unemployment an-
nouncement peaks by whether they reach unemployment rate-based maxima in line
with Garmaise et al. (2024).
   Our empirical method consists of two parts. First, we conduct an event study
to investigate how Google Trends search-intensity-based salience and Swedish house-
hold consumption change around unemployment rate and interest rate announcement
dates. Here, we descriptively examine whether attention and consumption changes
around announcement dates, and whether estimates vary across window lengths.
Second, we regress 14-day log consumption on announcement dates and salience
measures, while controlling for calendar fixed effects and macroeconomic conditions.
These regressions show whether salience amplifies consumption around announcement
dates, whether the association between announcements and consumption is concen-
trated in those that reach six-month salience maxima, and whether this association
further depends on direction.
   Our baseline regressions show that unemployment and interest rate announce-
ments are significantly and positively associated with consumption response within
our ±14-day window. Our most important finding is that, after splitting both an-
nouncement types by direction, only announcements indicating falling unemployment
are significantly associated with consumption response. Interest rate announcements
of either direction have no significant association with consumption. We interpret
this asymmetry as consistent with a buffer-stock model (Carroll, 1997), in which ac-
cumulated savings may shield households from short-term economic downturns, while
improving labor market conditions reduce perceived risk, thereby incentivizing house-
holds to spend excess buffers. This asymmetry persists: announcements indicating
falling unemployment that reach a six-month salience maximum are positively and
statistically significantly associated with consumption response, whereas announce-
ments indicating rising unemployment that reach a six-month salience maximum are
not significantly associated with consumption response. However, unemployment an-
nouncements that reach unemployment rate-based six- and twelve-month maximums
are negatively and statistically significantly associated with consumption response.
We interpret this contrast of significance for maximum estimates as a distinction
between active and passive attention, consistent with the Ostrich Effect (Karlsson,

   2
    As outlined in reports Finansinspektionen (2025)

                                    3
Loewenstein, and Seppi, 2009), where our Google Trends salience measure captures
active information search in response to good news, but fails to capture household
response when passively exposed to bad news. Finally, all estimates are conditional
associations rather than causal effects due to a small number of event dates. The
limited number of event dates reduces statistical power and makes these threshold-
based estimates sensitive to window length, as further elaborated in our robustness
analysis.
   Our findings illustrate how macroeconomic communication is associated with
household behavior by showing that consumption responses are not uniform around
announcement types. Consumption responses differ around announcements depend-
ing on whether they capture sufficient attention, and on their directional content.
Therefore, the framing and timing of unemployment and interest rate announcements
may affect how information is processed by households.
   The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews closely
related literature and how we contribute. Section III describes our data sources
and the construction of key variables such as the consumption-response and salience
measures. Section IV details empirical methodology. Section V presents the main
empirical results, beginning with a descriptive event-study, followed by regression
results including directional and maxima analyses. Section VI reports robustness and
Placebo tests. Section VII concludes.

                 II. Related Literature

Standard consumption theory models that households smooth consumption in re-
sponse to expected changes in income over time (Kimball, 1990; Ganong and Noel,
2019). However, this assumes that households are perfectly and continuously process-
ing relevant information. Attention is most likely limited, suggesting that macroe-
conomic announcements may only influence consumption when they become salient
                                                      3
enough for households to notice and process  .
   A large body of literature shows that households update beliefs infrequently. Car-
roll (2003) models that households intermittently update their beliefs through news,
implying that macroeconomic information spreads slowly across households. Similar
to this view of slow information diffusion, Sims (2003) models that rational inattention
limits information-processing capacity among agents. The attention literature also
provides evidence of asymmetric consumption response. Christelis et al., 2019 shows
that household consumption responds more strongly to negative transitory income
shocks than to positive shocks.
   Examining attention further, Maćkowiak and Wiederholt (2015) investigate how,
when information processing is costly, inattention becomes rational as consumers be-
come more selective in what they process. Moreover, Link, Peichl, Roth, and Wohlfart
(2023) show that attention is heterogeneous across consumers and state-dependent,
with periods of higher inflation associated with increased attention to macroeconomic
signals. These studies motivate our approach for testing whether macro announce-

   3
    As illustrated by Stanovich and West (2000) among others.

                                    4
ments are associated with consumption response response, and whether salience mod-
erates this relationship.
   Da et al. (2011) validate our Google Trends search intensity measure as a proxy
that captures attention. Moreover, Andrei and Hasler (2014) shows that changes
in attention, as measured through search behavior, are associated with higher stock
market volatility and risk premia.
   Our anchor paper, Garmaise et al. (2024), uses U.S. transaction data to study
whether local unemployment announcements that reach unemployment-rate maxi-
mums affect discretionary spending. They find that discretionary spending falls fol-
lowing both false and true maxima, but not near maxima, which they interpret as
evidence that salience affects consumption.
   While prior work shows that local unemployment announcements can affect con-
sumption (Garmaise et al., 2024), there is limited evidence on how these dynamics
operate across different macroeconomic announcement types and directions at a na-
tional level. We address this gap by using Sweden as a new setting, examining in-
terest rate announcements in addition to unemployment announcements, measuring
Google Trends search-based attention, and separating announcements by direction.
This approach allows us to compare two macroeconomic attention channels, identify
asymmetries in response, and determine whether search-based salience is associated
with consumption response.

                       III. Data

The dataset spans from January 1, 2019, to February 1, 2026. It consists of the
Swedish Riksbank’s policy interest rate (IR), recorded on each interest rate an-
nouncement date, and SCB’s monthly unemployment announcements (U ), measured
in percentage points. The Swedish Riksbank holds meetings 5 to 8 times a year to
discuss and announce interest rate policy, and the effective interest rate is usually
implemented between a day and a week after the meetings. We have chosen to record
the dates of the meetings and not of the effective change, which are published in the
Riksbank’s Penningspolitiska beslut. SCB announces unemployment rates for the pre-
vious month; we account for this delay by recording the release date as corresponding
to the previous month.
   Macroeconomic controls include a monthly inflation series (I), calculated as the
year-over-year percentage point change. Public attention is captured via daily Google
Trends search intensity for the topics ränta and arbetslöshet in Sweden. Finally, we use
daily credit card transaction data (c) as a measure of Swedish household consumption.
We obtain IR from the Swedish Riksbank, while U, I, and c are sourced from SCB.
Google Trends search-frequency data are collected via the Google Trends API or
downloaded directly from their website.
   To interpret our estimates as approximate percentage changes, we apply a natural
logarithm transformation to daily transaction volumes, ct. To isolate shifts in con-
sumer behavior around macroeconomic releases, we calculate the difference in average
log-consumption between fixed post- and pre-release windows. For a given date t and

                                    5
a one-sided window length k, we define our primary dependent variable, ∆k ln(ct), as:

                   ∑k
                             1
                     ∆k ln(ct) =      [ln(ct+i + 1) − ln(ct−i + 1)] (1)
                                   k i=1

   For brevity, we refer to this average log-difference simply as consumption or con-
sumption response throughout the remainder of the paper.
   Averaging consumption over the pre-release and post-release windows reduces
high-frequency noise and captures changes in consumption around announcement
dates, including potential anticipation before the release and delayed adjustment af-
terward. The window length is inspired by our event study analysis (see Section V.1),
a similar window used by (Garmaise et al., 2024). However, unlike (Garmaise et al.,
2024), we keep the 3 days surrounding the announcement to capture immediate re-
sponses inherent in daily transaction data.
   The temporal resolution of Google Trends data is dependent on the requested time
frame, which means that series over several years must be downloaded in smaller
chunks to get daily data. Further, Google Trends normalizes search volume data
within each requested time frame between 0 and 100, which means that the raw scale
of different time frames is inconsistent.
    To construct a consistent, long-term daily search frequency series for the interest
rate and unemployment topics τ ∈ {IR, U }, we use a version of splicing. We follow
the framework outlined by The International Monetary Fund (2017) and adapt their
scaling factor to a 30-day overlap, to mitigate noise in the daily data. Search intensity
                                                                       h nτ
data was downloaded in nτ overlapping 210-day segments {xτ }h=1. Each segment
(except h = 1) shared a 30-day overlap with the preceding segment, which was
utilized to calculate a splice factor, fτ,h, for each segment h:
                                 ∑210   h−1
                                                i=181 xτ,i
                           fτ,h =  ∑30  h
                                              j=1 xτ,j

                                                                h
where i and j represent daily index days. Each segment xτ was multiplied by its
chain-link factor fτ,h and subsequently concatenated together. The overlapping dates
were removed, and the series was z-scored, resulting in a continuous, consistently
                                                    4
normalized salience time series vector sτ,t.
    We define the baseline salience for a specific date as the average search frequency
over a 14-day window surrounding the date (± 7 days) as:

                        ∑7
                                   1
                                Sτ,t =       sτ,t+i
                                       15 i=−7

Averaging the windows prevents daily noise from distorting the results while capturing
the total attention surrounding the announcement, similar to Equation 1. Finally,
we construct indicator variables to identify high-salience events, defined as 1 if Sτ,t
represents a 6-month maximum and 0 otherwise, alongside standard binary indicators
for all release dates. An overview of the full dataset is provided in Table I.

   4
    See Figure 4 and related analysis for more information and validation.

                                    6
                                 Table I
                   Summary Statistics

This table reports summary statistics for all main variables used in the empirical analysis.
Salience for unemployment (SU ) and interest rate (SIR) reflect the z-scored Google Trends
search intensity for arbetslöshet and ränta, respectively, calculated over a ±7-day window.
ReleaseU and ReleaseIR are indicator variables equal to one on SCB unemployment release
dates and Riksbank interest rate change events, respectively. Unemployment- and interest
rate maxima within a 6-month window (U 6M ,IR6M ) are also indicator variables, equal
to one for release dates that reach 6-month maxima based on SU or SIR. Macroeconomic
controls include the unemployment rate, the effective interest rate change, and inflation.
Categorical calendar controls include the day of the month (DoM ), day of the week (DoW ),
and the month of the year (M onth)

 Variable n Mean SD Min Max
 Dependent Variables & Lags
 ∆3 ln(c) 2,582 0.0006 0.1591 -0.8391 0.7188
 ∆7 ln(c) 2,574 0.0012 0.0814 -0.3221 0.2280
 ∆14 ln(c) 2,560 0.0017 0.0738 -0.3008 0.1862
 6-day lag (∆3 ln(c)) 2,579 0.0005 0.1592 -0.8391 0.7188
 14-day lag (∆7 ln(c)) 2,567 0.0009 0.0813 -0.3221 0.2280
 28-day lag (∆14 ln(c)) 2,546 0.0015 0.0738 -0.3008 0.1862
 Independent Variables (Release Dates & Salience)
 ReleaseU 2,588 0.0328 0.1783 0.0000 1.0000
 SU 2588 -0.0013 0.9829 -2.0366 5.1341
 U 6M 2,588 0.0085 0.0918 0.0000 1.0000
 ReleaseIR 2,588 0.0166 0.1278 0.0000 1.0000
 SIR 2588 0.1450 0.9797 -1.2715 4.5624
 IR6M 2,588 0.0054 0.0734 0.0000 1.0000
 Macroeconomic Controls & Seasonality
 U (%) 2,588 8.1009 0.7652 6.7000 9.3000
 IR (pp) 2,588 1.3912 1.5908 -0.2500 4.0000
 I (%) 2,588 3.5696 3.5415 -0.4000 12.3000
 DoM (1-31) 2,588 15.7342 8.8041 1.0000 31.0000
 DoW (0-6) 2,588 3.0000 1.9994 0.0000 6.0000
 M onth(1-12) 2,588 6.4563 3.4810 1.0000 12.0000

 Note: Event counts: ReleaseU (85), U 6M (22), ReleaseIR (43), IR6M (14). n varies due to window construction.
   Table I shows that announcement dates are rare compared to the number of
observations within the full daily panel (n = 2, 588). ReleaseU captures 85 event
days, while ReleaseIR has 43 event days. High-salience events are even rarer for U 6M
and IR6M (n = 22 and n = 14). While daily frequency provides many observations,
the small number of announcements, and even smaller number of high-salience events,
reduces precision for event-specific estimates.
   Non-averaged Google Trends search intensity (not shown in the table) differ sub-
stantially between U and IR, with mean values 52.8 and 125.70 respectively. To

                                    7
ensure comparability in interaction estimates, the daily salience series are therefore
standardized to z-scores before averaging, which improves scaling and further compa-
rability between SU and SIR. We therefore interpret SU and SIR in standard-deviation
units, which prevents differences in baseline search volume from hindering consistent
interpretations. Finally, the substantial variation in macroeconomic controls during
our sample period, specifically the unemployment rate (6.7% to 9.3%) and policy
rate changes (−0.25 to 4.0 pp) motivates the inclusion of these variables to capture
attention-specific behavior and reduce omitted variable bias.
   To further understand the data, the Pearson correlation coefficient ρ between the
main variables of interest is computed (displayed in Table II). The strong positive cor-
relation between SIR and IR (ρ = 0.74) and I (ρ = 0.57) suggests that the interest
rate salience reflects the inflation and monetary-policy conditions during the period,
while correlations below one implies that our salience variables explain some varia-
tion distinct from macro variables. The pronounced correlation value between I and
SIR could reflect heightened household attention to interest rate changes, given the
large share of leveraged households with floating-rate mortgages. The weaker correla-
tion between SU,t and the macroeconomic controls may indicate that unemployment-
related search intensity is influenced by exogenous shocks or news rather than unem-
ployment levels.
                                 Table II
                    Correlation Matrix
This table reports the Pearson correlation coefficients ρ between the main variables used in
our analysis. ∆14 ln(c) is consumption response, constructed as the trailing 14-day mean of
the daily log difference in nominal Swedish household consumption (∆14 ln(c)). ReleaseU
and ReleaseIR are indicator variables equal to 1 on SCB unemployment release dates and
Riksbank interest rate event dates, respectively. SU and SIR are the standardized (z-scored),
±7-day average Google Trends series for arbetslöshet and ränta, respectively. U denotes the
Swedish seasonally adjusted unemployment rate (percent), IR denotes the Riksbank interest
rate change (percentage points), and I denotes monthly inflation (percent). The sample
covers January 2019 to February 2026

                           (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
         (1) ∆14 ln(c) 1.00
         (2) ReleaseU 0.13 1.00
         (3) SU 0.13 0.01 1.00
         (4) ReleaseIR 0.03 0.01 0.02 1.00
         (5) SIR 0.06 0.01 0.14 0.06 1.00
         (6) U (%) -0.00 -0.00 0.31 0.01 -0.09 1.00
         (7) IR (pp) -0.02 -0.00 0.08 0.01 0.74 0.08 1.00
         (8) I (%) 0.01 0.00 -0.36 -0.01 0.57 -0.49 0.36 1.00

   Notably, ∆14 ln(ct) shows a stronger correlation with SU (ρ = 0.13) than to SIR,t
(ρ = 0.06). Further, there is almost no correlation between release dates (ρ = 0.01),
which confirms that these events are independent, alongside a modest correlation
between SIR and SU (ρ = 0.14). Lastly, the negative correlation between U and I (ρ =
−0.49) is expected and aligns with standard macroeconomic theory on correlation.

                                    8
               IV. Empirical method

Our empirical method has two parts. First, we investigate the relationship between
household consumption and macroeconomic announcements. Second, we conduct
regressions relating consumption responses to announcement date indicators, jointly
and partitioned by direction. To capture public attention, we regress consumption on
a salience proxy based on Google trends and test for threshold effects via isolated high-
salience events. Lastly, to contextualize our results, we benchmark results against the
fundamentals-based indicators used by Garmaise et al. (2024).
   In the first part (section V.A), we conduct an event study. We examine the rela-
tionship between release dates and measured salience, descriptive consumption differ-
ences in windows surrounding release dates, and how consumption response changes
with varying window lengths. We also evaluate whether our salience proxy oscillates
around release dates by studying how Google Trends search intensity changes in the
±7-day window surrounding release dates.
   In the second part (sections V.B–V.D), we conduct regression-based analyses, us-
ing the variables defined and discussed in Section III. We control for unemployment,
the policy rate, and inflation. We also include categorical fixed effects capturing cal-
endar patterns (day of month, day of week, month, and year). Our main dependent
consumption response variable is related to the release-date indicators, and we test
whether the effect of salience operates through interaction terms involving release
dates or by salience 6-month maximum indicators. We also compare these salience
6-month maxima indicators to unemployment rate-based indicators, as used by (Gar-
maise et al., 2024) (6- and 12-month maximum unemployment rate announcement
dates). We estimate specifications separately for interest rate announcements and
unemployment rate announcements, and include joint estimates for robustness. Fur-
ther, we run regressions where we study increases versus decreases in the underlying
macroeconomic outcomes. The baseline specification is as follows:

              ∆14 ln(ct) = α + β1Releaseτ,t + β2Sτ,t + γXt + δt + εt

t indexes days and topic is indexed by τ ∈ U, IR. δt denotes calendar effects and
Xt contains the macroeconomic controls outlined above. We use Newey-West HAC
standard errors in our regressions to address autocorrelation in the daily data.

            V. Main Empirical Results

A. Event Study
In this section, we use event-study figures to assess how salience and consumption
move around macroeconomic announcement dates. Figure 1 compares Google Trends
search intensity-based salience and consumption response for unemployment and in-
terest rate announcements. Figures 2 and 3 subsequently examine whether announce-
ment estimates vary for different event-window length and splitting announcements
by direction. These figures provide descriptive evidence only, and complement our
regressions in section B.

                                    9
A.1 Salience and Consumption around Announcement Dates
We first use an event-study figure to descriptively analyze how consumption and
salience move around announcement dates. An indication of how consumption is
associated with salience and announcement dates can be found in Figure 1.

  Panel (a): Consumption change and Salience for Interest Rate Releases

  Panel (b): Consumption change and Salience for Unemployment Rate
  Releases

Figure 1: Salience and Consumption Responses to Economic Announcements. Panel (a)
plots Riksbank interest rate event dates and Panel (b) plots SCB unemployment release dates. In
both panels, the left y-axis reports non z-scored event-day Google Trends search intensity (SIR for
searches with the word ränta and SU for searches with the word arbetslöshet), measured using the
±7-day window for each corresponding announcement date. The black markers indicate announce-
ments classified as 6-month salience maxima. The right y-axis conveys the consumption response
(∆14 ln(ct)), defined as the difference in average log consumption within a ±14-day window, con-
structed using SCB’s transaction-based daily consumption index. Consumption response is adjusted
for calendar effects by regressing it on day-of-week, day-of-month, and month fixed effects. Solid
and hatched bars represent positive and negative residual consumption responses respectively.

    Figure 1 displays substantial variation in Google Trends salience across the series
of announcement dates, and especially for interest rate changes (Figure 1a).

                                    10
   In Panel (a), salience is higher from 2022 onward, in line with post-pandemic
inflation. The largest salience spike occurs around the September 2022 interest rate
announcement, which was the largest interest rate hike in our sample. These espe-
cially salient events in 2022 do not coincide with a uniform consumption response, two
are followed by higher residual consumption, while one is followed by lower residual
consumption. Collectively, these responses indicate that attention is not associated
with short-run household consumption around interest rate announcements.
   For Panel (b), Figure 1b displays substantial variation between events, although
unemployment salience varies less sharply than the interest rate series. Google Trends
search intensity levels are normalized within topic, so the difference in scaling between
unemployment and interest rate salience should not be interpreted as one topic being
more explanatory than the other. Figure 1 is therefore informative for within-topic
variation and six-month salience maxima. Moreover, unemployment 6-month maxima
appear more clustered over time, with consumption response direction varying around
unemployment announcement dates.

A.2 Unemployment Announcement Event Study
We next investigate whether these patterns remain consistent with varying window
lengths and announcement directions. We first examine this in Figure 2 for unem-
ployment announcements, allowing us to evaluate whether consumption response is
sensitive to varying window lengths, and whether response changes depending on
direction. Panel 2a varies event window length k, and Panel 2b plots consumption
response within a ±14-day event window. Both Panels split unemployment announce-
ments by direction.
   For Panel 2a, the aggregate series (All announcements, n = 85) starts at approx-
imately 0.025 at k = 1 and moves closer to zero at k = 5, staying between 0.01
and zero until k = 20. However, the confidence interval weakens around k ≈ 10,
suggesting that the estimated consumption response is insignificant at k ≈ 10. An-
nouncements indicating rising unemployment (n = 26) are followed by immediate
negative consumption for shorter windows, reaching -0.02 at k = 3, and moves above
zero at k = 8. Announcements indicating falling unemployment (n = 17) display a
flatter pattern on average, being close to zero for all k-days.
   Panel 2b shows similar descriptive patterns. The aggregate series (All releases,
n = 84) fluctuates around a zero baseline within the ±14-day window, showing no
clear shifts in consumption post-announcement. Unemployment announcements in-
dicating rising unemployment (n = 26) show a sharp decline in consumption post-
announcement, which corresponds to the short-window decline in Panel 2a. However,
large confidence intervals in Panel 2b, could reflect the small sample size or noise in
the data. Announcements indicating falling unemployment (n = 16) fluctuate mostly
below zero with no visible post-announcement break.

                                    11
    Panel (a): k-Dependence around Unemployment Announcements

Panel (b): Consumption response around Unemployment Announcements

Figure 2: Consumption Responses to Unemployment Rate Announcements. Panel (a)
plots the estimated consumption response (∆k ln(ct)) around unemployment releases as a function of
the event window length k ∈ {1, . . . , 20} days. Results are shown for all releases, and partitioned into
rising and falling unemployment rate. Panel (b) shows an event study of the consumption response
around unemployment announcements, where t = 0 is the release date. To adjust for calendar effects,
the underlying consumption index is the residual from an OLS regression of ln(ct) on day-of-month,
day-of-week, and month fixed effects. In Panel (b), this residual series (εˆt) is additionally smoothed
with a centered 3-day moving average. Shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals, and solid
lines represent sample means. The sample includes observations from 2019 through February 2026.
Discrepancies in event counts (n) between panels occur since Panel (b) excludes events which lack
consumption data for the full observation window.

   Taken together, these plots bring some evidence for consumption response being
positively associated with unemployment announcements, but we cannot fully con-
clude this based on Figure 2 alone. Furthermore, announcements indicating rising
unemployment may be associated with reduced household consumption, while unem-
ployment announcements indicating falling unemployment show no observable associ-
ation with consumption. The initial descriptive pattern is consistent with (Garmaise
et al., 2024) who find that U.S. discretionary spending falls after salient unemploy-
ment news. Nevertheless, we interpret these results cautiously.

                                    12
A.3 Interest Rate Announcement Event Study
Figure 3 employs the same event-study approach to interest rate announcements
from the Riksbank. We evaluate whether consumption response to interest rate an-
nouncements is sensitive to varying window lengths, and whether response changes
depending on direction.

     Panel (a): k-Dependence around Interest Rate Announcements

 Panel (b): Consumption response around Interest Rate Announcements

Figure 3: Consumption Responses to Interest Rate Announcements. Panel (a) plots
the estimated consumption response (∆k ln(ct)) around interest rate releases as a function of the
event window length k ∈ {1, . . . , 20} days. Results are shown for all releases, and partitioned into
hikes and cuts. Panel (b) shows an event study of the consumption response around interest rate
announcements, where t = 0 is the release date. We adjust for calendar effects by using the residual
from an OLS regression of ln(ct) on day-of-month, day-of-week, and month calendar effects as the
underlying index. In Panel (b), this residual series (εˆt) is additionally smoothed with a centered
3-day moving average. Shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals, and solid lines represent
sample means. The sample includes observations from 2019 through February 2026. Discrepancies
in event counts (n) between panels occur since Panel (b) excludes events which lack consumption
data for the full observation window.

   Figure 3 shows consumption responses around interest rate announcements. Panel
3a varies event window length k, and Panel 3b plots consumption response within a
±14-day event window. Both Panels split unemployment announcements by direc-
tion.
   Panel 3a shows that the k-day consumption response is not significant within most
designated windows. However, the series remains above zero from k = 10 onward,
which provides some support for a potential positive association between interest
rate announcements and consumption response. Splitting interest rate announce-
ments by direction, shows the sharpest short-horizon response, with consumption

                                    13
response peaking at roughly 0.065 around k = 1, subsequently declining and stabiliz-
ing near 0.02 from approximately k = 11 onward. Announcements indicating falling
interest rate (n = 8) show a flatter average pattern compared to the pattern of an-
nouncements indicating rising interest rate, but vary substantially before stabilizing
at approximately -0.01 for k = 5 onward.
   Panel 3b shows that consumption is not meaningfully associated with interest rate
announcements, and the plot for announcements indicating falling interest rate show
elevated consumption response throughout the ±14-day window. Because the con-
sumption level elevated before the rate cut date, we cannot attribute the post-event
level to the announcement. Instead, this elevated level likely reflects macroeconomic
conditions leading up to the event.
   The small number of directional events (n = 8, n = 9) generates wide confidence
intervals that cross the zero baseline for most announcements dates, especially in
Panel 3b. We therefore treat these results as suggestive.

B. Main Regressions
Taken together, the event-study figures in section A show substantial variation in
salience and consumption around unemployment and interest rate announcements.
However, these estimates do not control for macroeconomic conditions or calendar
effects, which we address in our main regressions in Section B. We first examine
whether Google Trends search intensity rises around unemployment and interest rate
announcements (Table III) and, secondly, whether these announcements and their
salience are associated with consumption response (Table IV). We then test whether
consumption’s association with announcements varies by direction (Table V) and,
finally, whether the consumption response to unemployment announcements is con-
centrated among six-month salience-based maxima (Table VI) or among six-month
and twelve-month unemployment rate-based maxima (Table VII).

B.1 Google Search Intensity around Release Dates
Before we employ Google Trends as a salience proxy, we first examine whether public
attention measurably spikes around scheduled macroeconomic announcements. In
Table III, we regress the Google Trends search series sτ,t for both topics on the
dummies ReleaseU and ReleaseIR equal to one if the date is within ±7 days of a
corresponding event date.

                                    14
                                 Table III
  Google Search Intensity around Macroeconomic Release
                        Dates
This table presents OLS regression estimates testing whether Google Trends search intensity
increases around release dates. Column (1) regresses the daily z-scored Google Trends series
sτ for the search word arbetslöshet (SearchU ) on a release-window indicator equal to one
for all dates within ±7-day windows of an unemployment release from SCB (ReleaseU ).
Column (2) displays interest rate announcements and regresses the Google Trends series for
the search word ränta (SearchIR), on a release-window indicator equal to one for all dates
within ±7-day windows of an interest rate release from Sweden’s Central Bank (ReleaseIR).
We control for on day-of-month, day-of-week, and month fixed effects and use Newey-West
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation-consistent (HAC) standard errors (15 lags). The
sample ranges from January 2019 to February 2026.

                                       SearchU SearchIR
                                               (1) (2)
                   ReleaseU 0.077
                                            (0.055)
                                                                         ∗∗∗
                    ReleaseIR 0.373
                                                       (0.034)
                    Calendar Effects Yes Yes
                    Observations 2,588 2,588
                         2
                 R                   0.500 0.541
                                    2
                  Adjusted R           0.489 0.531
                    Residual Std. Error 0.707 0.694
                                                        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
                     F Statistic 32.226     49.509

                                  ∗       ∗∗        ∗∗∗
                      Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01

   Table III reports whether Google Trends search intensity rises within ±7-day win-
dows around unemployment and interest rate announcements. Results indicate that
the interest rate release window is positively and statistically significantly associated
with increased search intensity (p < 0.01), reflecting the broad impact of Riksbank
announcements. In contrast, the unemployment release indicator shows no significant
relationship with salience when averaged over all announcements (p > 0.1 ). These
results differ from Garmaise et al. (2024), who conduct a similar analysis for local
unemployment announcements in the US and identify that Google Trends search in-
tensity within a week of an announcement is higher compared to non-release dates.
This discrepancy suggests that unemployment salience may be more state-dependent
or selective in the Swedish context than in the local US context. It is possible that
only the most unexpected or extreme releases, such as those marking unemployment
maximums or sharp directional shifts, capture household attention. Alternatively,
the response in Sweden may be more diffuse and less connected to specific announce-
ment dates compared to the US, a hypothesis we explore by controlling for directional
effects and maximum salience in the following sections.

                                    15
    A plausible interpretation for why the interest rate salience is significant across all
releases is the unique structure of the Swedish mortgage market. Riksbank interest
rate decisions directly impact the high share of the Swedish population with variable-
rate mortgages, possibly incentivizing households to monitor the announcements. In
contrast, monthly unemployment mainly affects households with individuals who are
at risk of becoming unemployed, which may represent a smaller share of households
compared to those with floating-rate mortgages. While interest rate announcements
may more consistently capture to public attention, unemployment rate announcement
shocks may be more persistent.

B.2 Announcement Dates, Salience, and Consumption
We continue the analysis by investigating if announcement days are associated with
a different consumption response than non-announcement days, and if the salience of
the announcements amplify the association.
   Table IV reports regressions of consumption on release date indicators ReleaseU
and ReleaseIR , and on interactions between indicators and the corresponding salience
measures. We estimate unemployment and interest rate channels separately to iden-
tify how consumption moves around release dates and whether consumption response
is influenced by corresponding salience.
   Our baseline results in column (1) confirm some of the suggestive results from
figures 2 and 3, as both ReleaseU and ReleaseIR have a positive and statistically
significant effect on consumption. At baseline, consumption is 1 percentage point
higher for unemployment release dates (0.010, p < 0.05) and 1 percentage point higher
on interest rate change dates (0.010, p < 0.10). Baseline results remain significant
after controlling for calendar fixed effects, unemployment rate, interest rate changes,
                             2
and inflation. Moreover, R is similar for all columns at approximately 0.62, implying
that interacting salience does not change the models explanatory power.
   Salience interactions in columns (2) and (3) reveal a heterogeneous pattern. In
column (2), ReleaseU is positive and statistically significant at 0.009 (p < 0.05), SU
is also positive and statistically significant at 0.009 (p < 0.01), yet the interaction
term ReleaseU × SU contains a small coefficient of 0.003 and is insignificant. Column
(3) shows that ReleaseIR decreases to 0.007 and becomes insignificant, while SIR
remains positive and statistically significant at 0.008 (p < 0.10). The interaction
term ReleaseIR × SIR is negative at -0.005 and is insignificant.
   Collectively, Table IV offers limited support for attention amplifying consumption
response to unemployment and interest rate announcements. Release date coefficients
show a positive association with consumption response. SU and SIR are also associ-
ated with consumption response, but interactions are insignificant and therefore do
not support that attention moderates the interaction between announcements and
consumption.
    The lack of support does not fully rule out attention as a mechanism. Insignificant
interaction terms may be due to the continuous linear interaction term averaging the
consumption slope across all events, and therefore diluting responses which may only
be activated by directional or maximum events. This may be particularly true for
unemployment as supported by Table III.

                                    16
                             Table IV
       Effect of Release Dates and Overall Salience on
                   Consumption

The table displays estimates for consumption regressed on unemployment release date indi-
cators (ReleaseU ), interest rate release date indicators (ReleaseIR) and salience measures.
Unemployment salience (SU ) and interest rate salience (SIR) consist of z-scored Google
Trends search intensity for arbetslöshet and ränta, averaged using ±7-day windows around
each date. Interaction terms (ReleaseU × SU ) and (ReleaseIR × SIR ) combine release-date
indicators with matching salience. Column (1) displays only release-date indicator results.
Columns (2) and (3) interacts salience with unemployment release date and interest rate re-
lease date indicators. Newey-West heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation-consistent (HAC)
standard errors (28 lags) are reported in parenthesis. All specifications include time fixed
effects and macro controls. The sample ranges from January 2019 to February 2026.

                                           Dependent variable:
                                                ∆14 ln(ct)
                                      Baseline Salience Interactions
                                         (1) (2) (3)
                                               ∗∗       ∗∗
                 ReleaseU 0.010      0.009
                                      (0.004) (0.004)
                                              ∗
                 ReleaseIR 0.010                  0.007
                                      (0.006) (0.005)
               ReleaseU × SU 0.003
                                                   (0.005)
                ReleaseIR × SIR -0.005
                                                               (0.005)
                                                              ∗∗∗
                SU 0.009
                                                   (0.004)
                                                                             ∗
                SIR 0.008
                                                               (0.004)
                Time FE Yes Yes Yes
                 Macro controls Yes Yes Yes
                  Observations 2,560 2,560 2,560
                     2
                R                 0.619 0.628 0.621
                               2
                Adjusted R         0.611 0.620 0.613
                                              ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
                  F Statistic 31.857     30.952      29.758
                             ∗       ∗∗        ∗∗∗
                  Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses.

                                    17
B.3 Directional Effects Study
We further test whether consumption response varies by direction of announcements
in Table V by separating unemployment and interest rate announcements by sign.

                             Table V
 Consumption Responses by Announcement Direction and
                    Salience Interactions
This table reports regression of consumption on directional release date indicators, salience
measures, and interaction terms. Unemployment increase (U+) and unemployment decrease
(U−) indicate rising and falling unemployment respectively. interest rate increase (IR+) and
decrease (IR−) indicate interest rate increases and decreases respectively. Unemployment
salience (SU ) and interest rate salience (SIR) are z-scored Google Trends search intensity
for arbetslöshet and ränta respectively. Column (1) and column (2) report estimates for
unemployment and interest rate respectively. All specifications control for day-of-month,
day-of-week, and month fixed effects, as well as unemployment rate, interest rate changes,
and monthly inflation. Wald-test p-values compare directional coefficients and salience
interactions. Newey-West standard errors (28 lags) are reported in parenthesis. The sample
ranges from January 2019 to February 2026.

                                             Dependent variable: ∆14 ln(ct)
                                                  (1) (2)
          U+ -0.004
                                                (0.008)
                                                             ∗
          U− 0.014
                                                (0.008)
                                                            ∗∗∗
           SU 0.009
                                                (0.003)
          U+ × SU -0.003
                                                (0.010)
          U− × SU 0.006
                                                (0.008)
           IR+ -0.005
                                                                 (0.019)
           IR− -0.037
                                                                 (0.036)
                                                                               ∗
           SIR 0.008
                                                                 (0.004)
          IR+ × SIR 0.014
                                                                 (0.015)
          IR− × SIR 0.021
                                                                 (0.028)
           Time FE Yes Yes
            Macro controls Yes Yes
            Wald Test: Inc = Dec (p) 0.100 0.435
             Wald Test: Sτ,t-interactions (p) 0.510 0.823
            Observations 2,560 2,560
                         2
           Adjusted R                     0.620 0.613
                                                         ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
             F Statistic 29.289          28.262
                       ∗       ∗∗        ∗∗∗
             Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses.

                                    18
   Table V reports regressions of consumption on directional release date indicators,
salience measures, and directional salience interactions. Column (1) splits unemploy-
ment announcements into rising and falling releases and Column (2) splits interest
rate announcements into rate cut and hike releases. The Wald test examines whether
directional and interaction terms have different estimates for each announcement type.
   Splitting announcement types by direction suggest that the positive coefficient
for ReleaseU in Table IV may be concentrated in unemployment announcements
documenting a decline. Most importantly, releases for falling unemployment are as-
sociated with higher consumption within a 14-day window compared to non-release
dates, whereas interest rate announcements of either direction are not associated
with consumption response compared to non-release dates. SU remains positive and
statistically significant, while SIR strengthens to 0.008 (p < 0.1).
   Column (1) shows that U− is positive and statistically significant at 0.014 (p <
0.10), suggesting that consumption is approximately 1.4% higher on announcement
dates reporting falling unemployment compared to non-announcement dates. U+ is
close to zero at −0.004 and not significant. The Wald test comparing U− and U+
produces a p-value of 0.100, weakly indicating that consumption response differs be-
tween rising and falling unemployment announcements. While falling unemployment
announcements are associated with a rise in consumption, we lack the power to con-
clude that the consumption response is asymmetric compared to announcements on
rising unemployment.
   In column (1), SU is positive and statistically significant at 0.009 (p < 0.01),
remaining unchanged from Table IV. The directional unemployment interactions,
U+ × SU and U− × SU , maintain small coefficients at −0.003 and 0.006, respectively,
and are not significant. The Wald Test provide no evidence of an asymmetric response
for the interaction terms (p > 0.1).
   Compared with the pooled unemployment coefficient (ReleaseU ) at 0.010 (p <
0.05), in Table IV, directional estimates imply that average consumption response
is more strongly associated with falling unemployment announcements, and more
weakly associated with rising unemployment announcements.
   The weakly significant asymmetry between rising and falling unemployment rate
announcements contrasts with the broader asymmetric-consumption literature, which
often finds stronger consumption responses to negative income shocks than to positive
ones (Shea, 1995; Christelis, Georgarakos, Jappelli, Pistaferri, and van Rooij, 2019).
One reason for this contrast could be that the household saving rate in Sweden is high
compared to the global average, a rate that has been increasing even further since the
             5
pandemic  . Thus, many Swedish households may have accumulated buffers which
could make them less sensitive to immediate rises in unemployment. Conversely,
falling unemployment may improve household-perceived economic outlook and reduce
uncertainty, which in alignment with a buffer-stock interpretation (Carroll, 1997),
possibly increases household consumption via spending excess buffers.
   Moving to Column (2), IR+ (−0.005) and IR− (0.037) are not significant. Ta-
ble IV reports a positive association between interest rate announcements and con-
sumption with ReleaseIR at 0.020 (p<0.006), but Table V shows that this association

   5
    See the following report published by the Swedish Riksbank: (Sveriges Riksbank, 2023)

                                    19
disappears when dividing announcements by direction.
   SIR is positive and statistically significant at 0.008 (p < 0.1), in line with the inter-
est rate salience measure in Table IV. Both directional interaction terms, IR+ × SIR
and IR− × SIR, have positive coefficients of 0.014 and 0.021, respectively, but nei-
ther is significant. The Wald Test reveals no asymmetric behavior between rate hikes
and rate cuts, and none for their interaction terms either (p > 0.1 ). Therefore,
Table V gives no evidence that salience amplifies consumption response to interest
rate announcements, partitioned by direction. Rather, the SIR coefficient seems to
be continuously associated with consumption response. Interest rate directional in-
significance aligns with Carroll (2003) whose model estimates that households update
inflation expectations approximately once per year. Because interest rate changes di-
rectly affect inflation conditions, infrequent updating of inflation expectations may
reduce immediate response to rate-hikes and rate-cuts. Since SIR is continuous while
IR+ and IR− are discrete, there is a higher likelihood that the continuous measure-
ment picks up the infrequent updating under Carroll (2003)s model, explaining the
significant association between SIR and consumption overall. However splitting in-
terest rate announcements by direction yield insignificant results for IR+ and IR−,
and corresponding interaction terms, indicating that they may capture an insufficient
amount of variation in the consumption response. However, these findings should be
interpreted with caution due to the few rate hikes (n = 8) and rate cuts (n = 9) in
our dataset.
   Moreover, combining low salience events with high salience events through a con-
tinuous salience metric could also add noise to the results by mixing routine releases
with unexpected shocks. It is plausible that only the most salient events where
salience reach an attention threshold has a meaningful association with household
consumption, an hypothesis we test in the following section.

                                    20
B.4 Salience and Unemployment Rate-Based Maxima
In this section, we investigate if especially salient announcements are associated with
a different consumption response compared to non-announcement days. First, we in-
vestigate announcements that reach a salience-based six-month maxima, and second,
we investigate announcements that reach a six-month or twelve-month unemployment
rate-based maxima.
                             Table VI
     Effect of High-Salience Releases on Consumption

This table reports regressions of consumption on 6-month maximum salience release indi-
cators. Unemployment salience (SU ) and interest rate salience (SIR) are z-scored ±7-day
Google Trends search intensity for keywords arbetslöshet and ränta. U 6M and IR6M are
dummies equal to 1 on release days when SU or SIR reach a 6-month maximum. U 6M+ and
U 6M− split unemployment salience maxima by announcement direction. Column (1) re-
ports unemployment estimates, column (2) reports interest rate estimates, and column (3)
reports directional unemployment estimates. All specifications control for day-of-month,
day-of-week and month fixed calendar effects (Time FE), as well as unemployment rate,
interest rate changes, and monthly inflation (Macro controls). Newey-West standard errors
(28 lags) are reported in parenthesis. The sample ranges from January 2019 to February
2026. Directional effects for interest rate events are omitted due to insufficient events (n = 4
and n = 3).

                                     Dependent variable: ∆14 ln(ct)
                               Overall (U) Overall (IR) Directional (U)
                                    (1) (2) (3)
           U 6M 0.009
                                  (0.007)
           IR6M 0.006
                                                 (0.011)
           U 6M+ -0.007
                                                                 (0.014)
                                                                              ∗∗∗
           U 6M− 0.027
                                                                 (0.009)
                                         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
             SU 0.009                      0.009
                                  (0.003) (0.003)
                                                             ∗∗
             SIR 0.008
                                                 (0.004)
             Time FE Yes Yes Yes
             Macro controls Yes Yes Yes
              Observations 2,560 2,560 2,560
                 2
             R                0.628 0.621 0.628
                           2
             Adjusted R        0.620 0.613 0.620
                                         ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
              F Statistic 30.303        29.622          29.736
                        ∗       ∗∗        ∗∗∗
              Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses.

   Table VI reports results for 6-month maximum salience indicators for aggregate
and directional estimates for unemployment. Column (1) shows that U 6M is posi-
tive but not significant at 0.009. Unemployment salience, SU , remains positive and

                                    21
statistically significant at 0.009 (p < 0.01), in line with the earlier estimates. Based
on column (1), the results suggest that unemployment release windows surrounding
6-month salience maxima are not significantly associated with consumption response
responses beyond the level of attention already captured by the model.
   Column (2) displays results for interest rate events. IR6M is positive at 0.005
but is not significant. SIR remains unchanged and positive at 0.008 (p < 0.05).
Therefore interest rate release windows surrounding six-month salience maxima are
not significantly associated with consumption response responses, similar to column
(1).
   In column (3), we identify one of our key findings by splitting announcements by
direction. U 6M− is positive and highly significant at 0.027 (p < 0.01). However,
U 6M+ is negative but not significant at −0.007 (p > 0.1). We interpret these results
to indicate that only highly salient reports indicating falling unemployment are sig-
nificantly associated with positive consumption response. Meanwhile, highly salient
announcements indicating rising unemployment are not significantly associated with
consumption response response. The U 6M− estimate is 0.027, which is approximately
twice the size of U− at 0.014 (p<0.1) in Table V, where U− aggregates all falling un-
employment announcements for all salience levels. The linear interaction for U− in
Table V may average consumption response across regular and maximum events,
weakening the estimated coefficient. The increase in magnitude for the coefficient U−
suggests that the association between consumption response and falling unemploy-
ment announcements may be concentrated among especially salient announcements.
   The unemployment salience term SU is positively associated with consumption re-
sponse across our estimates at approximately 0.009 (p < 0.01). The estimate remains
significant regardless of whether we include an interaction term, when we interact
salience with release indicators, or the structure of the interaction term. Since SU is
estimated using a ±7-day average search intensity, the estimate aggregates correla-
tions both before and after a given announcement, meaning we cannot interpret it
causally. While reverse causality is unlikely, omitted variables such as macroeconomic
shocks and media cycles not captured by controls could affect both consumption and
salience simultaneously.
   Importantly, the results in Table VI should be treated as suggestive rather than
causal. High-salience subsets of unemployment announcements are few (n = 9 for
U 6M+ and n = 5 for U 6M−) which limits statistical power, and all coefficients are
descriptive associations conditional on macroeconomic controls, not causal effects, as
discussed in Subsection C.

                                    22
                              Table VII
   Effect of Fundamentals-Based Maximum Indicators on
                   Consumption

This table reports regressions on consumption on fundamentals-based unemployment max-
ima indicators, in a specification similar to Garmaise et al. (2024). U6_HIGH and
U12_HIGH indicate unemployment announcements that reach a 6-month or 12-month
maximum unemployment rate. ReleaseU is a dummy equal to 1 on standard unemploy-
ment announcement days. Column (1) reports the threshold specification for U6_HIGH
and column (2) for U12_HIGH. Both columns include lagged dependent variables to ac-
count for serial correlation. All specifications control for day-of-month, day-of-week and
month fixed effects, as well as the current unemployment rate, interest rate changes, and
monthly inflation. Newey–West HAC standard errors are reported in parentheses. The
sample ranges from January 2019 to February 2026.

                                        Dependent variable: ∆14 ln(ct)
                                            (1) (2)
                                                      ∗∗
             U6_HIGH −0.017
                                          (0.008)
                                                                        ∗∗
              U12_HIGH -0.018
                                                           (0.009)
                                                  ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
                 ReleaseU 0.015           0.015
                                         (0.005) (0.005)
                Time FE Yes Yes
                 Macro controls Yes Yes
                 Lagged Dep. Var. Yes Yes
                  Observations 2,532 2,532
                     2
               R                  0.643 0.643
                               2
                Adjusted R           0.635 0.635
                  Residual Std. Error 0.045 0.045
                                                  ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
                  F Statistic 30.556          35.758
                             ∗       ∗∗        ∗∗∗
                  Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses.

   Table VII reports regressions of the consumption response on unemployment rate-
based maxima. Column (1) shows that announcements that reach six month maxima
(n = 25) correspond to a 1.7% contraction in consumption (p < 0.05). Column (2)
shows a response similar in magnitude at 1.8% (p < 0.05, n = 22).
   The Google Trends based salience models in Table VI demonstrate that household
consumption is significantly associated with highly salient announcements of falling
unemployment rates, but not to salient rises. Conversely, the fundamentals-based
threshold model adapted from Garmaise et al. (2024) demonstrates a significant neg-
ative association between unemployment announcements of 6-month and 12-month
maximum rates with consumption.
   This asymmetric response may be driven by positive labor-market news poten-
tially motivating households to actively search for unemployment-rate information,
captured by our Google Trends measure. However, unemployment announcements
for rising unemployment may elicit a different behavioral response. A moderate rise
in the unemployment rate may elevate household concern, but not enough to change

                                    23
consumption or motivate active information search. Announcements indicating ris-
ing unemployment may therefore only influence household spending when the rate
increase becomes large enough to reach households passively through word of mouth,
news coverage, or social media. If only passive household exposure to rising unem-
ployment announcements that reach a maximum attract enough household attention
to elicit a consumption response, Google Trends search intensity may not capture
this passive response effectively. Rather, our Google Trends search intensity mea-
sure may disproportionately capture active information search in response to falling
unemployment announcements.
   This interpretation is consistent with the Ostrich Effect, where model testing
reveals that investors monitor their portfolios more actively during rising markets than
during stagnant or falling markets (Karlsson et al., 2009). Households may, through
the Ostrich Effect, be less likely to actively search for unemployment information
following negative labor market news, and conversely more likely to do so following
positive labor market news. However, this interpretation is purely suggestive, as this
regression identifies associations rather than causal links.

              VI. Robustness Checks

To ensure reliability of our baseline results, this section presents a series of robustness
tests. This is of particular importance given the limited number of observations in
certain specifications, as well as potential sensitivity of estimates as a consequence of
averaging windows in the dependent variable and the salience measure.
   First, we re-run our baseline specifications while excluding the COVID-19 pe-
riod to verify that our baseline estimates are not exclusively driven by the structural
volatility of early 2020. Second, we conduct a pre-trend placebo test using lagged
variables to investigate long-term dependencies and autocorrelation, which is espe-
cially important due to the averaging windows used for our consumption and salience
variables. Finally, we examine different event window lengths (k-window) for con-
sumption to assess whether associations still hold at different time horizons.

A. Covid-19 Robustness Check
The year 2020 experienced large shifts in household consumption and unusual levels of
news coverage, and therefore may disproportionally influence consumption response
and Google Trends search intensity. We address this in Table VIII by running regres-
sions excluding observations from 2020.

                                    24
                              Table VIII
  Robustness Analysis Excluding the Onset of COVID-19

This table reports regressions for the unemployment and interest rate channels when ex-
cluding the initial year of the COVID-19 pandemic in Sweden (2020). Columns (1) and
(3) report the full-sample estimates for unemployment and interest rate channels, respec-
tively. Columns (2) and (4) display estimates after excluding the year 2020. Panel A
displays release-date and salience interaction specifications, Panel B displays directional
specifications and Panel C displays 6-month salience interactions. For each row, the ta-
ble displays estimates for release-date indicators (Release), Google Trends search intensity
(Sτ , τ ∈ {U, IR}), their interaction with salience (Release × Sτ ), directional-salience inter-
actions (Increase × Sτ and Decrease × Sτ ), and 6-month maxima indicator interactions
with salience (U 6M+ and U 6M−). All specifications control for day-of-month, day-of-week
and month fixed effects, as well as for the unemployment rate, interest rate changes, and
monthly inflation. Newey-West standard errors (28 lags) are reported in parenthesis. The
sample ranges from January 2019 to February 2026.
                                   Unemployment (U) Interest Rates (IR)
                              Full Sample No COVID Full Sample No COVID
                                       (1) (2) (3) (4)
  Panel A: Salience Interactions
                                            ∗∗      ∗∗∗
  Release 0.009        0.010          0.007 0.005
                                     (0.004) (0.004) (0.005) (0.006)
 Release × Sτ 0.003 0.006 -0.005 -0.002
                                     (0.005) (0.006) (0.005) (0.006)
                                            ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗      ∗
  Sτ 0.009        0.014         0.008         0.007
                                     (0.003) (0.005) (0.004) (0.004)
  Panel B: Directional Effects
                                                           ∗∗
 Increase × Sτ -0.003 0.025         0.014 0.017
                                     (0.010) (0.012) (0.015) (0.016)
 Decrease × Sτ 0.006 0.002 – –
                                     (0.008) (0.009)
 Panel C: 6m-Max Salience (U)
 U 6M+ -0.007 0.011 – –
                                     (0.014) (0.007)
                                            ∗∗∗      ∗∗
 U 6M− 0.027       0.020         – –
                                     (0.009) (0.009)
 Time FE & Macro Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes
  Observations 2,560 2,195 2,560 2,195
        ∗       ∗∗        ∗∗∗
  Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01

   Table VIII reports robustness estimates excluding 2020, the first year of the
COVID-19 pandemic. In panel A, the coefficients where 2020 is excluded show similar
magnitudes and significance compared to the full sample, with ReleaseU only slightly
increasing from 0.009 (p < 0.05) to 0.010 (p < 0.01), Release × SU remains insignif-
icant, and SU increases from 0.009 (p < 0.01) to 0.014 (p < 0.01). Similar results
are seen in the interest rate columns, with most coefficients remaining insignificant
and SIR decreasing from 0.008 (p < 0.05) to 0.007 (p < 0.1). Panel A suggests that
Release and Sτ are not exclusively explained by observations from 2020. In panel
B, Increase × SU becomes significant after excluding 2020 at 0.025 (p < 0.05), but
Decrease × SU remains insignificant. One plausible interpretation is that the signif-

                                    25
icance of U+ × Salience when excluding COVID-19 comes from noise caused by the
reduced number of events.
   In Panel B, SIR decreases from 0.008 (p < 0.05) to 0.007 (p < 0.1), suggesting some
sensitivity to interest rate changes during 2020. However, the patterns remain the
same for ReleaseIR, which remains positive and insignificant, and for Release × SIR,
which remains positive and insignificant.
   For Panel C, U 6M− remains significant, but its coefficient decreases from 0.027
(p < 0.1) to 0.020 (p < 0.05), while U 6M+ remains insignificant.
   Overall, excluding 2020 does not substantially change the main unemployment
and interest-rate salience coefficients, but it does change one of the linear directional
interaction estimates in Table VIII. Increase×SU becomes significant after excluding
2020 which may reflect increased sensitivity due to a smaller number of windows
increasing noise for the estimate.

B. Pre-trend placebo test
Our interpretation of baseline results is predicated on consumption response being
linked to the actual announcement date windows rather than exogenous conditions
around announcement dates. We therefore conduct a placebo test that shifts an-
nouncement and salience estimates forward by fourteen and twenty-eight days. This
test helps us assess whether our results effectively capture response from announce-
ment timing, or whether baseline estimates reflect autocorrelation, persistence, or
other time-series-related confounding influences.
   Table IX reports results from a placebo test in which release-date windows are
shifted forward by 14 and 28 calendar days. Results from the 14-day shift show
that ReleaseU decreases from 0.010 (p < 0.05) to -0.005 (not significant), and the
ReleaseIR coefficient falls from 0.007 to -0.001, remaining insignificant. These pat-
terns support that original release-date indicators in columns (1) and (4) are associ-
ated with consumption response response within their windows across calendar time.
    Moving to the 28-day shift, we observe a different pattern, revealing positive, sig-
nificant coefficients for both unemployment and interest rate announcements. ReleaseU
and SU become 0.013 (p < 0.1) and -0.009 (p < 0.1), respectively. ReleaseIR and SIR
become 0.016 (p < 0.1) and -0.003 (not significant), respectively. The t+28 placebo
results for ReleaseU bring evidence against our timing interpretation, but the result
is partly explained by the calendar structure of the data. SCB’s unemployment an-
nouncements are released regularly once per month, so shifting indicators forward 28
days, approximately a month, places placebo indicators near consecutive announce-
ments. This potential overlap suggests that ReleaseU coefficient at t+28 may not
capture the delayed response of original announcement dates, but rather the response
to regular monthly announcements. This is a limitation in our placebo design because
the shifted indicator placebo cannot isolate non-announcement dates.
   The t+28 placebo results for ReleaseIR are more concerning, as the Riksbank in-
terest rate announcements occur less frequently as well as irregularly. Therefore, the
significant and positive coefficient for ReleaseIR at t+28 likely reflects the delayed
consumption response, the confounding time-series variation, or the potential overlap
with monetary-policy news, instead of the regular calendar pattern observed in unem-

                                    26
                             Table IX
            Placebo Test: Shifted Release Dates
This table reports placebo regressions of consumption response on release-date indicators
and salience measures shifted forward by 14 and 28 calendar days. The Row "Release Date"
reports the coefficients for the announcement indicators. The row Sτ , τ ∈ {U, IR} reports
the coefficient on the corresponding z-scored Google Trends salience measure, using arbet-
slöshet for unemployment columns and ränta for interest-rate columns. Columns (1) and
(4) show original specifications for unemployment and interest rate channels, respectively,
where Google Trends search intensity (Salience) is measured at their actual dates. Columns
(2) and (5) shift regression forward by 14 calendar days, and columns (3) and (6) shift the
regression forward by 28 calendar days. Shifted variables flag dates that are not actual
release windows. All specifications control for day-of-month and month fixed effects, as well
as for the unemployment rate, interest rate changes, and monthly inflation. Newey–West
HAC standard errors are reported in parentheses. The sample ranges from January 2019
to February 2026.

                            Dependent variable: Consumption (avg log-diff, k = 14)
                          Unemployment (U) Interest Rate (IR)
                       Real t + 14 t + 28 Real t + 14 t + 28
                        (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

                             ∗∗                 ∗∗∗                                ∗∗∗
 Releaseτ 0.010      -0.005 0.013       0.007 -0.001 0.016
                      (0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.005) (0.006) (0.006)

                            ∗∗∗       ∗∗       ∗∗∗      ∗       ∗∗
 Sτ 0.009     -0.008    -0.009      0.008    -0.010         -0.003
                      (0.003) (0.004) (0.003) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004)
 Time FE & Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
 Observations 2,560 2,560 2,560 2,560 2,560 2,560
   2
 R                   0.628 0.626 0.628 0.622 0.623 0.619
                            ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
 F Statistic 26.84     30.23     34.98     26.93     27.84         27.99

        ∗       ∗∗        ∗∗∗
 Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01. HAC standard errors in parentheses (Newey-West, 28 lags). Models include all
  macro controls and calendar fixed effects.

ployment announcements. Lastly, the shifted placebo indicators for unemployment
and interest rate salience are negative for both changes, all significant except for SIR
at t+28. We interpret the coefficients as possibly reflecting autocorrelation or mean
reversion in our Google Trends search intensity series.
C. Sensitivity to k-window choice
Our baseline analysis uses 14-day windows for its estimates to reduce daily noise
in household consumption. However, these longer 14-day windows may average out
short-run response to announcements. We therefore test whether our results are
sensitive to window length k. Table X compares our baseline ±14-day window to
shorter responses calculated over ±3- and ±7-day windows, allowing us to evaluate
whether baseline estimates reflect persistent consumption response or short-run shifts
around announcement dates.

                                    27
                             Table X
 Robustness Analysis across Consumption Window Lengths

This table reports regressions of consumption response around unemployment and interest
rate announcements. Columns (1)-(3) display unemployment estimates and Columns (4)-(6)
display interest rate estimates. In Panel A, Releaseτ , τ ∈ {U, IR} indicates unemployment
announcements in columns (1)-(3) and interest rate announcements in columns (4)-(6). In
Panel B, τ 6M indicates when Google Trends search intensity reaches a 6-month maximum
for unemployment (τ = U ) and interest rate (τ = IR), respectively. Sτ,t is the z-scored
daily Google Trends search intensity for keywords arbetslöshet for columns (1)-(3) and ränta
for columns (4)-(6). Increaseτ is an indicator for announcements reporting an increase in
unemployment or interest rate, and Decreaseτ is an indicator for announcements reporting a
decrease in unemployment or interest rate. Panel C presents decrease indicator Decreaseτ
and increase indicator Increaseτ and their interactions with Sτ,t: Decreaseτ × Sτ,t and
Increaseτ ×Sτ,t. All specifications control for day-of-month and month fixed effects, as well
as for the unemployment rate, interest rate changes, and monthly inflation. The sample
ranges from January 2019 to February 2026.

                                         Dependent variable: ∆k ln(ct)
                    Unemployment (τ = U ) Interest Rate (τ = IR)
                    k = 3 k = 7 k = 14 k = 3 k = 7 k = 14
                        (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
 Panel A: Baseline Release Date Effects
                                                 ∗∗      ∗                       ∗
 Releaseτ 0.007 0.011 0.010     0.028     0.014 0.010
                      (0.010) (0.008) (0.004) (0.016) (0.009) (0.006)
 Panel B: 6-Month Salience Maxima
                            ∗∗
 τ 6M 0.030     0.006 0.009 0.030 -0.002 0.005
                      (0.014) (0.007) (0.007) (0.027) (0.014) (0.011)
 Panel C: Directional Effects and Interaction
 Increaseτ 0.002 -0.003 -0.004 0.059 0.011 -0.005
                      (0.021) (0.013) (0.008) (0.042) (0.032) (0.019)
 Increaseτ × Sτ 0.036 0.003 -0.003 -0.019 0.013 0.014
                      (0.024) (0.013) (0.010) (0.029) (0.020) (0.015)
                                      ∗      ∗       ∗∗
 Decreaseτ -0.004 0.025    0.014    -0.271     -0.081 -0.037
                      (0.018) (0.014) (0.008) (0.119) (0.058) (0.036)
                            ∗∗                         ∗∗∗
 Decreaseτ × Sτ 0.038     0.020 0.006 0.221      0.066 0.021
                      (0.016) (0.016) (0.008) (0.082) (0.043) (0.028)
 Time FE & Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

        ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
 Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;    p<0.01. HAC standard errors in parentheses (Newey-West, 2k lags). IR directional
 results involve small sample sizes (n = 9, n = 7 events) and should be interpreted with caution.

   Table X reports estimates of consumption response to unemployment and interest
rate announcements for different window lengths, with k = 3, 7, and 14 days. Panel A
displays baseline release-date estimates for both announcement types. The ReleaseU
estimate varies minimally in magnitude for all window lengths with 0.007 at k = 3,
0.011 at k = 7, and 0.010 at k = 14. However, standard errors decrease as the

                                    28
averaging window become longer, and the coefficient becomes significant only at k =
14 (0.010, p < 0.05). The consumption response to unemployment announcements is
more precisely estimated with longer windows, suggesting that longer windows reduce
noise while shorter windows are more sensitive to daily noise in consumption.
   Panel B reports estimates for 6-month salience maxima for unemployment releases
and interest rate changes. U 6M is significant only at k = 3 (0.030, p < 0.05), null for
longer windows, and IR6M is insignificant across all window lengths. We interpret
the lack of significance for U 6M at k = 7 and k = 14 to reflect sensitivity to noise in
consumption response within the short window only at k = 3. Alternatively, the U 6M
coefficient significance may not survive longer windows as increased window length
averages out short-run consumption response, leaving significant association at k=3.
The lack of significant interest rate announcement coefficients, in line with previous
patterns, suggests that interest rate announcements are not significantly associated
with consumption response. We treat the Panel B results cautiously, as the U 6M
indicator is a pooled measure that includes both directions, and we therefore do not
believe that it undermines our interpretation of the directional U 6M− interaction in
Table VI.
    Panel C reports estimates of directional interactions with continuous salience. The
DecreaseU coefficient is negative and insignificant at k = 3 (−0.004), and becomes
positive and statistically significant at the longer horizons (0.025, p < 0.1 at k =
7; 0.014, p < 0.1 at k = 14), suggesting that longer averaging windows reduces
sensitivity to daily noise in consumption, in line with the precision pattern in Panel
A. Conversely, DecreaseU ×SU (0.038, p < 0.05), DecreaseIR (−0.271, p < 0.05), and
DecreaseIR×SIR (0.221, p < 0.01) are all significant at k = 3 and become insignificant
at longer windows. These coefficients may reflect sensitivity to noise in consumption
response due to short window lengths. Alternatively, DecreaseU × SU may reflect
the same significance pattern for U 6M in Panel B, where longer windows average
out short-run consumption response associated with announcements indicating falling
unemployment that reach a six-month salience maxima, leaving significant association
at k = 3.
   Collectively, 6-month maximum salience indicators and directional interactions
show sensitivity to the choice of consumption window k. Significant estimates for
window length k = 3 could suggest short-run consumption response. Nevertheless
, significant short-run associations for window length k = 3 may reflect sensitivity
to noise in consumption response, especially for interest rate announcements which
consist of observations (n = 16). Nevertheless, significant associations for U 6M and
DecreaseU × Sτ may reflect short-run response that could be investigated in future
research. Overall, the robustness test brings support to using 14-day windows for our
baseline regressions, where longer windows average out daily consumption noise, and
shorter ones remain sensitive to consumption noise.

                                    29
                   VII. Conclusion

This paper investigates whether Swedish household consumption changes around
SCB’s unemployment and Riksbank’s interest rate announcement dates, and whether
Google Trends search intensity, as a measure for salience, amplifies consumption re-
sponse. Using transaction-based Swedish household consumption data from 2019
to 2026, we examine announcement date effects, directional announcement effects,
Google Trends salience maxima, and unemployment rate-based maxima.
   Our main finding is that announcements indicating falling unemployment that
reach 6-month salience maxima are associated with 2.7% higher consumption, whereas
pooled unemployment announcements that reach six and twelve month unemploy-
                           6
ment rate-based maxima are associated with −1.7% and −1.8% lower consumption
respectively.
   Examining research question one, our baseline regression coefficients suggest that
unemployment rate and interest rate announcements are positively associated with
consumption response response. Moreover, splitting estimates by direction reveals
asymmetric consumption associations, with the most precise estimate for falling un-
employment. Meanwhile both directional interest-rate announcements and announce-
ments indicating rising unemployment show no significant association with consump-
tion.
   For our second research question, we find evidence that continuous salience does
not significantly amplify consumption surrounding announcement dates. However
partitioning unemployment announcements by direction, and isolating the most salient
events, reveals an asymmetry where salience amplifies consumption around announce-
ments indicating falling unemployment, but not for announcements indicating rising
unemployment. Moreover, six-month and twelve-month unemployment rate-based
maxima announcements are significantly and negatively associated with consump-
tion response.
    In sum, results suggest three different possible interpretations. First, the stronger
association between consumption and announcements indicating falling unemploy-
ment is consistent with Carroll (1997)’s buffer-stock savings model, where positive
labor-market signals may reduce perceived income risk and incentivize precautionary
savings, possibly making households more able and willing to spend. Second, the
insignificant directional estimates for interest rate announcements can be interpreted
within Carroll (2003)’s macroeconomic expectations framework, in which households
update inflation expectations less frequently than for unemployment information.
Third, the distinction between estimates for salience-based and unemployment rate-
based maxima could reflect the ostrich effect. Announcements indicating falling
unemployment may provoke active information search among households, which is
captured by our salience measure. Meanwhile, announcements indicating rising un-
employment may be ignored by households until they become extreme enough to
reach households passively through news and social media, which our Google Trends
measure does not capture, but our six- and twelve- month unemployment rate-based
maxima do capture. This is in line with Garmaise et al. (2024) whose fundamentals-

   6
    As corroborated in the local US context by Garmaise et al. (2024)

                                    30
based maxima may capture consumption response that do not coincide with higher
Google Search intensity.
   However, we are cautious to interpret our results too broadly. Robustness checks
bring some support for our central findings, where baseline coefficients and U 6M re-
main similar in magnitude and statistically significant after excluding the year 2020.
Moreover, the t + 14 lag placebo reveals insignificant release-date coefficients, and
brings support to ±14-day consumption windows for our baseline regressions. Sig-
nificant coefficients for window length k = 3 raise some concerns, nevertheless we
interpret them to likely be caused by increased sensitivity to noise in consumption.
Additionally, we cannot rule out hidden factors that we cannot fully control, such
as information shocks that occur at the same dates we examine. The significant
ReleaseIR coefficient at t + 28 highlights this concern as it cannot be explained by
regular scheduling of announcements, indicating potential confounding influences.
    Our findings contribute to both central banks and statistical agencies. For central
banks, specifically the Riksbank, our results indicate that the salience of interest rate
announcements is not significantly associated with consumption response. Rather,
our findings bring support to the idea that consumption adjusts slowly and infre-
quently to changing interest rates, which is not captured in specific announcement
dates but rather through aggregate salience. For statistical agencies like Statistics
Sweden, our findings have a different implication. We find that the most salient an-
nouncements indicating falling unemployment are positively and statistically signifi-
cantly associated with consumption response, which has implications for the framing
of unemployment-rate announcements indicating a decrease. However, we find no
significant association between Google Trends-based salience for announcements in-
dicating rising unemployment and consumption, which may suggest that framing is
not as important for these types of announcements. For empirical macroeconomic
researchers studying salience effects, our results suggest that maxima-based event
designs can capture consumption response, whereas continuous salience interactions
may not be as effective.
   There are several extensions that would improve identification. Splitting release
dates by whether they are surprises or follow median forecasts would help estab-
lish whether consumption responds to news content or the announcement itself, and
obtaining household-level transaction data would resolve heterogeneity issues. Alter-
native attention measures, such as newspaper coverage and media coverage, could
validate the Google Trends proxy further. Investigating consumption response for
shorter windows could provide additional information on potential short-run con-
sumption responses and sensitivity to noise. Finally, a longer series with more an-
nouncements for both channels would increase statistical power. We invite future
work to examine this further.

                                    31
                   References

Andrei, D. and M. Hasler (2014, September). Investor attention and stock market
  volatility. Review of Financial Studies 28 (1), 33–72.
Carroll, C. D. (1997, February). Buffer-stock saving and the life cycle/permanent
  income hypothesis. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1), 1–55.
Carroll, C. D. (2003, February). Macroeconomic expectations of households and
  professional forecasters. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1), 269–298.
Christelis, D., D. Georgarakos, T. Jappelli, L. Pistaferri, and M. van Rooij (2019,
  May). Asymmetric consumption effects of transitory income shocks. The Economic
  Journal 129 (622), 2322–2341.
Da, Z., J. Engelberg, and P. Gao (2011, September). In search of attention. The
  Journal of Finance 66 (5), 1461–1499.
Finansinspektionen (2025, April). The swedish mortgage market: Households need
  to have margins for an uncertain future. Report, Swedish Financial Supervisory
  Authority.
Ganong, P. and P. Noel (2019, July). Consumer spending during unemployment: Pos-
  itive and normative implications. American Economic Review 109 (7), 2383–2424.
Garmaise, M. J., Y. Levi, and H. Lustig (2024, April). Spending less after (seemingly)
  bad news. The Journal of Finance 79 (4), 2429–2471.
International Monetary Fund (2017). Quarterly National Accounts Manual: Concepts,
  Data Sources, and Compilation. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Karlsson, N., G. Loewenstein, and D. Seppi (2009, February). The ostrich effect:
  Selective attention to information. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 38 (2), 95–115.
Kimball, M. S. (1990, January). Precautionary saving in the small and in the large.
  Econometrica 58 (1), 53.
Link, S., A. Peichl, C. Roth, and J. Wohlfart (2023). Attention to the macroeconomy.
   SSRN Electronic Journal.
Maćkowiak, B. and M. Wiederholt (2015, August). Business cycle dynamics under
  rational inattention. The Review of Economic Studies 82 (4), 1502–1532.
Shea, J. (1995). Union contracts and the life-cycle/permanent-income hypothesis.
  The American Economic Review 85 (1), 186–200.
Simon, H. A. (1971). Designing organizations for an information-rich world. In
  Computers, Communications, and the Public Interest. Johns Hopkins University
  Press.
Stanovich, K. E. and R. F. West (2000, October). Individual differences in reasoning:
  Implications for the rationality debate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23 (5),
  645–665.
Sveriges Riksbank (2023, September). Household savings increased significantly dur-
  ing the pandemic. Article in monetary policy report, Sveriges Riksbank.

                                    32
              A. Chain-link validation

To complement the event style analysis, we plot the raw, z-scored daily Google Trends
search series sU,t and sIR,t for unemployment and interest rate over the period January
2021 to February 2026 (see Figure 4). Unlike the event-window averages Sτ,t, the raw
frequencies show the more volatile daily dynamics that the averaging is designed to
be robust to.

Figure 4: Raw z-Scored Daily Salience Series. The raw, z-scored daily Google Trends search
index sIR,t (upper panel) and sU,t (lower panel) over January 2019–February 2026 are plotted.
Series are constructed by normalizing within a rolling 30-day chain-link window and standardizing
to unit variance. Dashed vertical lines mark Riksbank announcement dates (upper panel, N = 44)
and Statistics Sweden (SCB) unemployment release dates (lower panel, N = 85). Highlighted lines
identify dates on which the series attains a six-month maximum.

    We observe two differences between the series. Firstly, sIR,t exhibits sharp spikes
that decay rapidly which start to appear after the rate hikes in 2022. The unemploy-
ment series sU,t displays a smoother and more persistent pattern, with an extended
increase during COVID-19 and moderate variation thereafter. The distinct shapes
reflect, in part, the different release mechanics of the two indicators. Unemployment
statistics are published mid-to-late in the month and refer to the month before, which
introduces a structural lag that may spread public attention over a broader window as
households gradually update their beliefs. Interest rate decisions in general take effect
within days of the announcement, which generates more concentrated search activ-
ity. Thus, sU,t seems to capture a more sustained form of macroeconomic attention,
while sIR,t captures more distinct shocks. The effect of the averaging window used
to construct Sτ,t becomes a smoothing of noise but also a decrease in absolute signal
strength around sharp events for interest rate, while it captures a more spread-out
and general attention level for unemployment.
    To test the chain-linking reliability, the series were compared with control series
stitched with different overlap lengths (10) and with a different starting download

                                    33
date. The Pearson correlations between the main and control series were 0.992 for
unemployment and 0.9996 for interest rates, indicating that the z-scoring and chain-
linking algorithm yielded consistent measures.

                  AI Disclosure

We have made use of the AI tools Gemini, Grammarly and Claude Code to assist
with table formatting in LaTeX, grammar and Python code verification. However,
interpretations, conclusions and analyses presented in this work are entirely our own.

                                    34