The Indexer´s Dilemma

Rational choices and irrational volatility

PATRIK SUNDLÖF

JOAR ERICSSON

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics, 2026
Abstract:

This paper examines whether institutional fund flows, driven by index inclusion, affects stock
volatility and performance in the Swedish equity market — with an S&P 500 sample serving
as a comparative benchmark. Using a mediation analysis framework on two panel datasets
covering 2016 to 2025, we find no evidence of ownership-related index effects in the
Swedish market. This suggests that the findings of prior US-based literature may not be
directly transferable to markets dominated by mutual funds rather than ETFs, where the
arbitrage mechanism of the latter may play a crucial role in transmitting such effects. We do,
however, observe volatility enhancing index effects in the Swedish market through
alternative channels. Thus, we are unable to rule out that ownership effects do exist in the
Swedish market but go undetected due to noise in our institutional ownership proxy variable.
Due to the endogeneity issues inherent to index construction, causal inference regarding
return effects is not possible in either market, although we do observe a relative
underperformance of indexed stocks – possibly attributable to hindsight bias, differences in
dividend policy or index bubble mechanics. Whilst index-related return effects require no
immediate action from the passive investor, the volatility findings do give cause for attention
as OMXS30 stocks appear to carry genuinely higher price variation at both at the individual
stock and portfolio level.

Keywords: Index effects, ownership effects, demand shocks, ETF-arbitrage, passive
investing, mutual funds, stock volatility, OMXS30, S&P500

Authors:

Patrik Sundlöf (25944)
Joar Ericsson (25997)

Tutor:

Marieke Bos, Associate Professor, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

Ramin Baghai, Professor, Swedish House of Finance

Bachelor Thesis

Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics

© Patrik Sundlöf and Joar Ericsson, 2026

                                                                          2
TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 3
2.0 Background .......................................................................................................................... 5
  2.1 Challenging the Perfect Elasticity of Stock Demand Curves ........................................... 6
  2.2 Index Inclusion Effects and their relation to Institutional Ownership ............................. 6
  2.3 ETF Ownership and Volatility Transmission Mechanisms ............................................. 7
   2.4 The Swedish Institutional Landscape ............................................................................... 8
3.0 Research Design................................................................................................................... 9
   3.1 Hypotheses ..................................................................................................................... 12
   3.2 Data Collection ............................................................................................................... 14
   3.3 Empirical model ............................................................................................................. 16
4.0 Empirical Results ............................................................................................................... 21
   4.1 Descriptive Statistics ...................................................................................................... 22
   4.2 Results of Hypothesis 1: First-stage effect ..................................................................... 24
  4.3 Results of Hypothesis 2: Second-stage effect ................................................................ 25
   4.3 Results of Hypothesis 3: Indirect effect ......................................................................... 25
   4.4 Results of Hypothesis 4: Direct Effect ........................................................................... 25
  4.5 On the observed effects of our Controlling Variables .................................................... 26
5.0 Discussion .......................................................................................................................... 26
   5.1 Institutional Ownership and Volatility Effects............................................................... 27
     5.1.1 OMXS30: Idiosyncratic Noise and the Absence of Ownership Effects .................. 27
     5.1.2 S&P 500: Identification Failure and Proxy Limitations .......................................... 29
   5.2 Index-effects on Stock Performance .............................................................................. 29
  5.3 Limitations and Implications for interpretation ............................................................. 31
     5.3.1 On limitations of the Proxy, Beta Estimation and Omitted Variables..................... 32
     5.3.2 Endogeneity Issues and Unreliable Performance-related Index Effects ................. 33
     5.3.3 Implications for Further Study ................................................................................ 34
   5.4 The Exploitability of the observed Index Effects........................................................... 35
6.0 Conclusion ......................................................................................................................... 37
   References ............................................................................................................................ 39
   AI declaration ....................................................................................................................... 42
Appendix A: Summary statistics ............................................................................................. 43

                                                                          3
1.0 Introduction

The popularization of passive investment strategies represents one of the most significant
structural shifts in modern financial markets. Partly, this trend can be attributed to the rise of
online brokerage platforms - commonly called "neobrokers" - that provide access to index-
tracking ETFs and mutual funds at close to zero cost. Sweden exemplifies this
transformation, with retail platforms like Avanza and Nordnet serving millions of investors,
while substantial equity portfolios accumulate through the Swedish premium pension
(Premiepension) and occupational pension (Tjänstepension) schemes. As of December 2023,
financial corporations—including mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies—
held approximately 31% of Swedish listed equities, with foreign institutional investors
controlling an additional 37% (Statistics Sweden, 2024). This high concentration of
institutional ownership raises fundamental questions about how passive ownership affects
asset prices in the Swedish market.

Traditional asset pricing theory, grounded in Modern Portfolio Theory (Markowitz, 1952),
the Capital Asset Pricing Model (Sharpe, 1964), and the Efficient Market Hypothesis (Fama,
1970), assumes that stock demand curves are perfectly flat and infinitely elastic - with prices
reflecting only fundamental values and ownership structure being economically irrelevant
(Modigliani and Miller, 1958). However, later research has undermined these assumptions,
with Shleifer (1986) providing early evidence of inelastic stock demand with the study of
S&P500 index effects. Similarly, De Long et al. (1990) as well as Koijen and Yogo (2019)
have shown that under conditions of limited arbitrage capital, institutional fund flows may
induce additional volatility and persistent deviations from fundamental values. Ben-David et
al. (2018) also provides evidence that US ETF ownership directly affects long-term stock
volatility and that investors earn return premiums for bearing this additional risk.

However, it remains poorly understood if these dynamics observed in an American ETF-
dominated market, are transferable to a Swedish mutual fund dominated context. This paper
seeks to examine whether institutional fund flows, driven by index inclusion, increase
stock volatility and performance in the Swedish equity market, where passive
investment flows occur primarily through open ended mutual funds rather than ETFs.

Using institutional ownership as a proxy variable for institutional fund flows, we will be
constructing a mediation effect model, with institutional ownership acting as the mediator
between index inclusion and stock volatility and performance. If index inclusion raises
institutional ownership (H1), and the elevated ownership levels also generate non-
fundamental trading pressure that affects stock volatility and performance (H2) - then they
would together constitute an indirect effect (H3) of index inclusion on our dependent
variables, through the institutional ownership channel. We also test whether index inclusion
exerts direct effects on stock volatility and performance, through channels independent of
institutional ownership levels (H4). Testing whether the relationship runs primarily through
institutional ownership or through other index-related channels allows us to isolate the
specific mechanism at work. If no significant indirect effect is found, this would indicate that

                                                                          4
ownership-related index effects may be specific to the US context and possibly dependent on
the market presence of the ETF arbitrage mechanism.

The result of the study may be of interest to retail investors and academics alike, as it will
provide evidence on whether ownership effects extend beyond ETFs to also encompass
mutual funds, providing first evidence from Swedish markets. The findings will also improve
the wider understanding of the implication of passive investing strategies on market
efficiency and risk.

                                                                          5
2.0 Background

This section reviews the theoretical and empirical foundations for understanding how
institutional fund flows affect stock prices and volatility, as well as how the Swedish
institutional landscape distinguishes our setting from prior US-focused research.

2.1 Challenging the Perfect Elasticity of Stock Demand Curves

Traditional asset pricing models, such as the Capital Asset Pricing Model (Sharpe, 1964)
assume that stock demand curves are perfectly elastic, with equilibrium prices unaffected by
the size of demand. In extension, this assumption also implies that ownership structure is
economically irrelevant (Modigliani and Miller, 1958), as prices are seen to equal the
discounted value of expected future cashflows regardless of who holds the shares and how
frequently they trade. Similarly, the expected return of a stock is determined solely by
exposure to undiversifiable risk factures (under the CAPM captured by the market beta).

However, later research seriously challenges some of these assumptions, with Shleifer (1986)
providing among the first evidence of inelastic stock demand in his study of S&P500 index
inclusion effects. Modern research also highlights the fact that traditional asset pricing
models require unlimited arbitrage capital to enforce pricing discipline and uphold market
efficiency. For example, De Long et al. (1990) demonstrate that capital constrained
arbitrageurs may be unable to fully absorb the demand shocks propagated by large
institutional fund flows or investors trading on non-fundamentals, resulting in sustained
deviations from fundamental values. Furthermore, if institutional investors (such as index
tracking ETFs) hold correlated portfolios and trade simultaneously, the demand shocks they
induce may constitute systematic rather than diversifiable risk, for which investors demand a
risk premium. The inelasticity of stock demand curves is further supported by Koijen and
Yogo (2019), who demonstrate that heterogenous stock preference among investors also
makes for heterogenous stock demand, with increased institutional demand able to raise the
price of individual stocks by up to two percent. Much like De Long et al. (1990), Koijen and
Yogo (2019) attribute these findings to limited arbitrage capital preventing arbitrageurs from
fully exploiting the mispricings arising when large institutional investors rebalance their
portfolios.

Ultimately, the existence of inelastic demand curves establishes that ownership structure may
be economically relevant in the markets, as stocks with concentrated institutional ownership
possibly become more sensitive to the trading decisions of their owners.

                                                                          6
2.2 Index Effects and their relation to Institutional Ownership

The empirical foundation of our identification strategy comes from the extensive literature
documenting that index inclusion affects stock prices through institutional ownership
changes. The existence of the traditional “index effect” has been well-documented since
Shleifer (1986). Studying the performance of stocks added to the S&P500 between 1976 and
1983, Shleifer (1986) shows that these stocks experience average abnormal returns of around
three percent upon their inclusion announcements. Shleifer argues that these price increases
demonstrate the increased demand pressure from index funds purchasing the new index-
constituents (also providing early evidence against the perfect elasticity of demand). These
findings are confirmed by Harris and Gurel (1986) and later extended upon by Chen,
Noronha, and Singal (2004) who demonstrate that a reversed (negative) effect can be
observed upon deletion from the S&P500. Chen, Noronha, and Singal (2004) also illustrate
how such effects seem to have increased over time with the growing popularity of index
funds, seeing ever growing AUM.

Together, these foundational studies establish that index inclusion may induce institutional
demand shocks capable of moving stock prices independent of fundamentals, forming the
basis for using index membership as an identification strategy of ownership effects in
subsequent research.

However, recent evidence suggests that the traditional “index effect” phenomenon may have
disappeared or even reversed. Greenwood and Sammon (2024) document that the abnormal
returns of stocks added to the S&P500 fell from around 7% in the 1990s, to less than 1%
during the 2010s – despite index tracking practices being more prevalent than ever before.
Even more strikingly, Vijh and Wang (2022) find that over the period 2016 to 2020, stocks
added to the S&P500 from the S&P400 experienced negative announcement returns (-2.5%),
while deletions experienced positive returns (+1.2%) - indicating a complete reversal of the
historical pattern. The authors attribute the observed results to changes in ownership
dynamics, where the midcap stocks of the S&P400 see substantial institutional ownership just
like the large cap stocks in the S&P500. Thus, migrating from the top of the S&P400
to the bottom of the S&P500 (both being market weighted indexes) no longer induces a
noticeable institutional demand shock.

These developments may work to compromise the use of S&P500 index inclusion as an
identification strategy for studying institutional ownership effects.

                                                                          7
2.3 ETF Ownership and Volatility Transmission Mechanisms
The extent of index inclusion effects is taken further by Wurgler (2010) who demonstrates
that index inclusion not only induces non-fundamental price pressure but also increases the
co-movement of constituent stocks, which may affect volatility through enhanced trading
activity. These effects are expanded upon by Ben-David et al. (2018), who demonstrate how
passive investment strategies may directly affect stock volatility. Studying the firms of the
popular Russel 2000 and Russel 1000 indexes between 2000 and 2012, Ben-David et al. find
that the largest companies in the Russel 2000 index experience substantially higher rates of
ETF ownership and significantly greater return volatility, than the smallest stocks in the
Russel 1000 index. By comparing the similarly sized companies on either side of the arbitrary
cut-off point of the Russel indexes in a quasi-natural experiment setup, Ben-David et al. are
able to establish a positive relationship between the rate of ETF ownership and return
volatility - even when controlling for other characteristics such as firm size, liquidity and bid-
ask spreads. The establishment of this causal link is crucial, as it cements that ETF ownership
causes higher volatility rather than volatile stocks attracting ETF ownership.

Ben-David et al. (2018) theorize that the observed effect operates through the creation-
redemption mechanisms of the ETF arbitrage process, where authorized participants (APs)
can profit by trading on the divergence between the market price of the ETF and the NAV of
the basket of underlying securities. For example, when an ETF experiences large inflows, its
market price may temporarily rise above NAV – creating an arbitrage opportunity that the
APs utilize by purchasing the basket of underlying stocks, thus propagating the flow shock to
all underlying securities and inducing non-fundamental volatility. In addition, Ben-David et
al. find that stocks being exposed to such additional volatility also earn higher average returns
even when controlling for traditional systemic risk factors, as is consistent with investors
demanding a risk premium for bearing additional undiversifiable risk. Brown et al. (2021)
support this interpretation, illustrating that whilst flow-induced returns tend to reverse over
subsequent days (as is consistent with temporary price pressure) long-term return premiums
remain – suggesting that persistent exposure to flow induced volatility constitutes a systemic
risk factor that is recognized and priced by the market. Brown et al. (2021) also finds that
ETF creation- and redemption flows provide powerful signals of short-term return reversals -
indicating genuine non-fundamental price distortion.

                                                                          8
2.4 The Swedish Institutional Landscape

As of December 2023, financial corporations (mutual funds, insurance companies etc.)
controlled around 30% of Swedish public equities, with an additional 37% controlled by
international institutional investors (Statistics Sweden, 2024). These concentrated ownership
dynamics makes the Swedish equity market an interesting arena for testing ownership-related
effects in a non-American context.

As documented by Dahlquist and Robertsson (2001), institutional ownership dynamics
exhibit noticeable differences from US patterns. Although Swedish retail investors hold
around 13% of publicly traded equities (Statistics Sweden, 2024), Dahlquist and Robertsson
(2001) find that most ownership patterns reflect institutional preferences rather than
individual investor behaviors, cementing the Swedish equity market as highly
institutionalized through mutual fund structures. Partly, these dynamics may be attributed to
the design of the Swedish pension system with the AP funds, premium pension
(Premiepension) and occupational pension (Tjänstepension) schemes, playing an outsized
role relative to foreign ownership. These pension schemes also generate consistent capital
flows and demand pressure on Swedish equities through regular mandatory contributions,
independent of market conditions or valuations - making the Swedish market an interesting
testing ground for ownership-induced demand shocks.

Perhaps most critically to the study of ownership effects, the vast majority of institutional
holdings of Swedish public equities are held through traditional mutual funds rather than
ETFs (Morningstar, 2025). Whilst both constitute passive investment vehicles, there are
several important differences between the two: with the intraday trading and arbitrage
mechanisms of the ETF possibly being able to amplify or even generate ownership-driven
demand shocks (Ben David et al., 2018). Traditional mutual funds differ fundamentally as
they utilize cut-off times and always trade at end-of-day net asset value (NAV), thus
eliminating arbitrage opportunities and the need for immediate coordinated trading across a
basket of stocks. Mutual fund managers can also absorb flows gradually over hours or days
using volume-weighted average price algorithms or block trading to limit market impact.
Furthermore, the difference in institutional features also imply that mutual funds do not
exhibit the same arbitrage mechanisms as ETFs do – shedding doubt on the transferability of
the effect to a Swedish, mutual fund dominated setting.

                                                                          9
3.0 Research Design

Previous literature establishes that when stock demand is inelastic and arbitrage capital is
limited, institutional owners can move stock prices through fund-flow induced demand
shocks (De Long et al., 1990, Koijen and Yogo, 2019). These ownership-related effects have
been seen to effect both stock volatility (Wurgler, 2010) and risk premiums through ETF
arbitrage-driven transmission (Ben-David et al., 2018). However, whether these ownership-
related effects operate universally or depend on specific institutional mechanisms like ETF
arbitrage being present in the market, remains poorly understood. With its high rates of
institutional ownership and large selection of mutual funds, we perceive the Swedish equity
market to be an ideal testing ground for studying the transferability of ownership-related
effects to a non-US, mutual fund dominated setting.

Our research employs a mediation analysis framework using panel data to test for ownership-
related effects on stock volatility and performance. With previous literature indicating that
index inclusion can be considered a reliable predictor of ownership changes (Shleifer, 1986;
Harris and Gurel, 1986, Chen, Noronha and Singal, 2004), our identification strategy seeks to
exploit the positive variation in institutional ownership historically associated with index
membership - where passive investing practices lead to index constituents experiencing
higher rates of institutional ownerships than similar stocks outside the index. However, given
the previously highlighted institutional differences between the US and Swedish markets,
there is no upfront guarantee that our identification strategy - historically deployed in US-
based research - is directly transferable to a Swedish setting. Furthermore, despite its
historical validity, recent research highlights a fading or reversal of traditional index effects
(Greenwood and Sammon, 2024; Vijh and Wang, 2022) which may infer that this
identification strategy have become less viable over time (even in the US market) as a result
of saturated institutional ownership also among non-large cap stocks.

By dividing our samples into two treatment- and control groups based on index inclusion, we
seek to test if the presumed differences in institutional ownership (arising from the trading
behavior of institutional investors) influence stock volatility and performance. This RDD-
style design, with treatment- and control groups being exposed to the same macroeconomic
environment, mitigates the risk of any observed differences being driven by common time-
varying factors over the sample period (such as the Covid-19 pandemic) rather than by our
variable of interest. Whilst not completely satisfactory, the RDD-style construction of the
tests also partly mitigates potential endogeneity concerns as firms near the OMXS30 cutoff
are similar by construction – with the rule-based cutoff constituting a semi-natural quasi
experiment (potential endogeneity issues related to index construction are elaborated in
Section 5.3.2.). Additionally, the deployment of a mediation framework allows us to
distinguish between ownership-related mechanisms (captured by the indirect effect), and
index effects operating through alternative channels (captured by the direct effect).

                                                                         10
In our analysis, we make use of two different panel datasets to test institutional ownership
effects across different market contexts. The Swedish sample consists of the 30 stocks in the
OMXS30 index, observed daily over the period January 2016 to December 2025, and the 30
largest non-index constituents over the same period. Institutional ownership, index
membership, and firm characteristics are all observed on an annual basis, with a control
group of 30 firms striking a balance between maintaining comparability to the treatment
group and ensuring sufficient statistical power. As the OMXS30 is extensively tracked by
Swedish mutual funds - particularly those included in the mandatory Swedish Pension
schemes – we are led us to believe that the previously documented differences in institutional
ownership between S&P500 and S&P400 stocks or Russel 1000 and Russel 2000 stocks may
also be visible across our two groups. The panel structure allows us to compare differences
across firms and over time, while controlling for time fixed effects as well as known systemic
risk factors and observable firm characteristics. To ensure identification from within-firm
variation over time, rather than cross-sectional differences between firms, we also include
firm fixed effects. This is particularly relevant to the study of institutional demand shocks
who are thought to arise from changes in institutional ownership by index membership, rather
than cross-sectional difference in the level of institutional ownership per se.

For comparison, we also make use of a US sample consisting of the 30 smallest stocks in the
S&P500 index (by market cap), observed daily over the period January 2016 to December
2025, and the 30 largest non-index constituents over the same period. This comparison serves
three purposes. First, it explores whether ownership-related index effects persist among large-
cap stocks in highly developed markets where the literature would suggest institutional
ownership levels to be similar across S&P500 stocks and non-index constituents. Second, by
covering a more recent period than much of the existing literature, it assesses whether
previously documented index effects have persisted, diminished, or reversed over time — a
question made particularly relevant by the arguments of Vijh and Wang (2022) and
Greenwood and Sammon (2024). Lastly, it provides methodological validation, as finding
common patterns across both the Swedish and US markets would suggest the existence of a
real phenomenon rather than an artifact of single sample issues. Just as for the Swedish
sample, we also control for time- and firm fixed effects, as well as for selected firm
characteristics and systemic risk factors.

                                                                         11
Figure 1. Illustration of the mediation effect model

This illustration pictures the mediation effect model used in the empirical analysis,
separating indirect effects through the institutional ownership channel, from index effects
operating through alternative channels captured by the direct effect.

The result of the study may be of interest to retail investors and academics alike, as it would
contribute to the understanding of institutional ownership effects and help answer if these
effects extend to mutual fund structures and international markets. If index membership can
be seen to increase the volatility of Swedish stocks through the institutional ownership
channel, this would demonstrate that ownership effects operate independently of the ETF
arbitrage mechanisms. Alternatively, if no such significant effects can be found, this may
suggest that the ETF arbitrage mechanism - absent for the mutual fund dominated Swedish
market - may be essential to the transmission of ownership-related effects. Based on the
results of the study, retail investors will be able to make more informed decisions when
deciding to place their money in passive investment vehicles – considering the possible added
risks associated with index tracking practices. Additionally, the findings will help clarify if
the popularization of index investing strategies may, paradoxically, increase the very
volatility said strategies seek to avoid in the first place.

                                                                         12
3.1 Hypotheses

Our mediation model framework tests the following four sequential relationships using panel
regressions:

Hypothesis 1: First-stage Effect
The first-stage effect (H1) examines whether index inclusion (our dummy variable) has a
significant effect on the rate of institutional ownership of individual stocks. We would expect
this effect to be positive and significant in the case of the Swedish sample, as stocks in the
OMXS30 index should exhibiting higher rates of institutional ownership as a result of passive
index tracking behavior. If such effects could be observed in the sample, we would reject the
null hypothesis. Previous US-based research indicates that this should be the case also in the
study of the S&P500 companies. However, recent literature questions this assumption,
implying a possible erosion of ownership-differences over time, resulting from
extensive index tracking also of American midcap-stocks.

H₀: Index inclusion has no significant effect on the rate of institutional ownership.
β_IndexInclusion = 0

H₁: Index inclusion has a significant effect on the rate of institutional ownership.
β_IndexInclusion ≠ 0

Hypothesis 2: Second stage Effect
The second-stage effect (H2) tests whether institutional ownership (used as a proxy variable
for the fund-flows whose effects we seek to study) has a significant effect on performance
and stock volatility, independent of index membership. In the case we observe such effects,
we reject the null hypothesis. If one is to believe the literature, we would expect institutional
ownership to exert positive and significant effects on volatility but not residual volatility, as
the correlated demand shocks arising from the simultaneous trading of index constituents
should induce systematic rather than idiosyncratic risk. If so, one would also expect to
observe positive and significant return effects as the market would presumably price the
added systematic risk. On the other hand, if the ETF arbitrage mechanism is essential to
ownership related effects, we should observe no significant effects on our neither of our
dependent variables in the Swedish sample. Furthermore, if institutional flows are
uncorrelated across Swedish funds, any observed effects on volatility may be idiosyncratic
rather than systematic.

H₀: Institutional ownership has no significant effect on stock volatility and performance.
β_InstitutionalOwnership = 0

H₁: Institutional ownership has significant effects on stock volatility and performance.
β_InstitutionalOwnership ≠ 0

                                                                         13
Hypothesis 3: Indirect Effect
The indirect effect (H3) quantifies whether index inclusion influences stock volatility and
performance through institutional ownership. This is done by calculating the product of the
first and second-stage coefficients. The finding of significant indirect effects would support
that index effects are partly attributable to changes in ownership structures and the associated
trading behavior of institutional owners, which would lead us to reject the null hypothesis.

H₀: There is no significant indirect effect of index inclusion on stock volatility and
performance, mediated through institutional ownership.
β_IndexInclusion × β_InstitutionalOwnership = 0

H₁: There is a significant indirect effect of index inclusion on stock volatility and
performance, mediated through institutional ownership.
β_IndexInclusion × β_InstitutionalOwnership ≠ 0

Hypothesis 4: Direct Effect
The direct effect (H4) estimates whether index inclusion exerts significant effects on stock
volatility and performance through other channels than institutional ownership. Thus, the
relative size and significance of the direct- and indirect effects will vary depending on what
channel the index effects primarily operate through. In the case of significant direct effects
being observable, we reject the null hypothesis. Testing these competing explanations across
Swedish and US contexts reveals both whether ownership-related effects are transferable to
non-American contexts and what mechanism may drive the index effects documented in
previous literature.

H₀: Index inclusion has no significant direct effect on the non-fundamental volatility and
stock performance of individual stocks.
β_IndexInclusion = 0

H₁: Index inclusion has a significant direct effect on the non-fundamental volatility and stock
performance of individual stocks.
β_IndexInclusion ≠ 0

                                                                         14
3.2 Data Collection
The panel data used in the empirical analysis has all been compiled and sourced from
CapitalIQ (owned and operated by S&P Global). Capital IQ is a widely used data source in
the finance industry, offering comprehensive coverage of financial data across a wide variety
of market and time periods. As a source, it is perceived to be highly reliable, as it is
extensively used in peer-reviewed research and trusted by our host institution, the Stockholm
School of Economics, lending credibility to findings derived from its data.

For the analysis, we will utilize 10 years of daily market price data collected over the period
January 2016 to December 2025. This includes daily market returns (OMXSPI and Russell
3000) and returns of individual stocks, in addition to yearly data on a collection of controlling
variables like ROA, Leverage, P/BV, and Market Capitalization (also gathered from Capital
IQ). The rationale behind the use of daily stock performance data is that annual observations
are insufficient to provide meaningful estimates of return-based metrics such as residual
volatility and market beta, which by construction require a time series of returns. Using daily
data yields hundreds of observations per company and year, providing additional statistical
precision to detect effects or differences that would be indistinguishable at an annual
frequency. Index inclusion and ownership data are observed at an annual frequency, as
institutional ownership data is typically disclosed on a year-end basis.

During the collection of ownership data, we also allowed Capital IQ to define what owners
qualify as "institutional". In the absence of publicly accessible direct fund flow data,
institutional ownership is used as a proxy on the basis that, on the margin, ownership levels
should rise and fall in line with net fund flows. This logic holds the best when institutional
ownership is dominated by active, flow-sensitive investors. This is, however, not necessarily
the case for our institutional ownership data which captures a broad range of investors, many
of which may be considered “quiet” long-term owners less likely to generate the flow-driven
demand shocks we seek to study. Notable examples include the Swedish AP funds, Alecta,
the Norwegian Sovereign Wealth Fund and family-controlled investment companies such as
Investor and Industrivärden.

It shall also be mentioned that reporting practices may at times distort ownership data through
significant stock lending or shorting practices. This means that heavily shorted stocks in our
sample, or stocks involved in significant stock lending activity, may exhibit rates of
institutional ownership that exceed 100% of common shares outstanding (as shorted stocks
are not regarded as “negative ownership”). This may act as an additional compromising
factor to skew our institutional ownership data.

Ultimately, this problem becomes central to identification. As our institutional ownership
variable also captures investors unlikely to generate the effects of interest, the sensitivity of
the test is reduced, and non-findings should be interpreted with appropriate caution rather
than as definitive evidence. While manually cleaning the data from suspected “quiet” owners
could in theory provide us with a cleaner measure of institutional ownership relevant to the
study of institutional demand shocks, we have refrained from such measures to avoid
introducing subjectivity into the sample construction. Selectively excluding certain owners
                                                                         15
based on assumed historical or future trading behaviors would risk biasing the analysis in
ways that make the study less scientific and more difficult to replicate. This of course comes
at the cost of a noisier proxy variable. The implications of this trade-off should be kept in
mind throughout the interpretation of our results.
3.3 Empirical model

To examine the effect of index inclusion on stock performance and volatility through
institutional ownership, we have constructed a Mediation effect model estimated using panel
regressions with firm and time fixed effects. The mediation analysis is implemented through
three regressions corresponding to paths a, b, and c′, allowing the total effect of index
inclusion to be decomposed into direct and indirect components.

Stock performance is measured using both average and risk-adjusted returns, where risk-
adjusted performance is captured by the CAPM alpha. Non-fundamental volatility is
measured as the standard deviation of the residuals, referred to as residual volatility. Average
returns and total volatility are calculated using standard formulas for the geometric mean and
sample standard deviation, while alpha, market beta, and residual volatility are estimated for
each stock using the traditional CAPM regression framework.

The variables from the CAPM are used to examine how index inclusion is related to different
aspects of stock behavior:

Beta is used to compare the level of market exposure between index and non-index firms.
This helps ensure that any differences in returns are not simply due to index firms being more
or less sensitive to overall market movements.

Alpha is used to test whether indexed firms perform better or worse than non-index firms
after controlling for market risk and other systemic risk factors (our control variables). This
allows us to evaluate the argument if index inclusion causes persistent deviations from
fundamental values, or whether institutional ownership constitutes a systemic risk factor that
warrants a corresponding risk premium.

Residual Volatility is used to analyze whether index inclusion affects the stability of stock
prices. Focusing on the part of volatility not explained by exposure to market risk allows us
to distinguish between systematic and idiosyncratic sources of variation – where one should
be priced by the market and the other should not.

Although models such as Fama–French include more factors, the CAPM is used in this study
because of its simplicity and interpretability - clearly separating market-related returns from
abnormal returns, which is useful when studying index effects. To make sure that other firm
characteristics do not drive the results, control variables are included for known risk factors
such as size, valuation, profitability, and leverage. This makes it easier to understand whether
our results are linked to index inclusion itself, rather than to differences in firm
characteristics.

                                                                         16
The hypotheses are evaluated based on the estimated coefficients of the Mediation model.
Evidence of mediation requires that (i) index inclusion has a statistically significant effect on
institutional ownership (path a), and (ii) institutional ownership has a statistically significant
effect on the outcome variable when controlling for index inclusion (path b). The indirect
effect is given by the product a×b and is assessed for statistical significance using
bootstrapped standard errors.

A significant indirect effect indicates that institutional ownership acts as a mediating channel
through which index inclusion affects stock performance and volatility. The direct effect (c′)
captures the remaining impact of index inclusion after accounting for ownership.

In the first step of our analysis, the CAPM model is estimated for each firm using daily
returns in order to obtain estimates for market-beta, alpha (abnormal returns) and residuals:

Where:

   𝑅𝑖𝑡 The return of firm i at time t
   𝑅𝑓𝑡 The risk-free rate (EURIBOR - EUR - 3 Month - Rate Value for Sweden and
          United States Treasury Constant Maturity - 3 Month (%TCMSM03) - Rate Value
          for the U.S.)
   𝑅𝑚 The market return (OMX Stockholm All Share Index (^OMXSPI) - Index Value
          for Sweden and Russell 3000 Index (^RUA) - Index Value for the U.S.)
    𝛼𝑖 Represents the abnormal return of stock i.
    𝛽𝑖 Captures the exposure to systematic market risk of stock i.
    𝜀𝑖𝑡 Represents the stock-specific return component that cannot be attributed to broad
          market movements, capturing non-fundamental price variation

In the second step, we estimate a series of panel regressions using average returns, volatility,
residual volatility, and CAPM alpha as dependent variables in turn. The main explanatory
variables include index inclusion and institutional ownership, alongside the firm-level control
variables: leverage, return on assets, price-to-book ratio, and market capitalization.

All regressions include year fixed effects to control for common macroeconomic shocks. This
specification allows us to identify the relationship between index inclusion, institutional
ownership, and firm performance using within-firm variation over time, while accounting for
observable firm characteristics known to influence stock returns and volatility. Firm fixed
effects are also included in the analysis as to absorb time-invariant firm heterogeneity and
ensure that any observed index effects are driven by within-firm changes as stocks move in
and out of the indexes, rather than cross-sectional differences between index and non-index
firms.

                                                                         17
To facilitate comparison across variables of different units, both dependent and independent
variables are standardized to have mean zero and unit variance.

Standardization formula:

                                                    𝑥𝑖 − 𝜇𝑥
                                        𝑍𝑖 =
                                                                        𝜎𝑋

Where:

    𝑧𝑖 The standardized value. Represents the number of standard deviations an
             observation lies above or below the mean.
     𝑥𝑖 The observed value of the variable in original units.
    𝜇 The mean value of the variable X, used to calculate how far an individual
            observation lies from the average value of the sample.
    𝜎 The standard deviation of the variable. Captures the typical dispersion of
          observations around the mean.

In total, three regressions are estimated as a part of the mediating effect model:

First, the first stage effect of index inclusion on institutional ownership is estimated as:

                                                                                         ′
                   𝑂𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡 + 𝑋 𝑖𝑡𝛿 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

Second, the total effect of index inclusion on the outcome variable 𝑌𝑖𝑡 is estimated as:

                                                                                ′
                         𝑌𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡 + 𝑋 𝑖𝑡𝛿 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

Third, the direct and indirect effects are estimated by including both index inclusion and
institutional ownership:

                                                                                               ′
               𝑌𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑂𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝𝑖𝑡 + 𝑋 𝑖𝑡𝛿 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

The indirect effect is computed as the product of the coefficients from the first and third
                       (𝑎)
regressions (i.e.,𝛽1   × 𝛽2).

Where 𝑌𝑖𝑡(DV) is one of four dependent variables:

    1. Average Return
   2. CAPM Alpha (from previous CAPM regression)
    3. Volatility
    4. Residual Volatility (from previous CAPM regression)

                                                                         18
And where the independent variables are:

      𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡 Binary variable, equal to 1 if firm i is included in the OMXS30 or
                    S&P500 indexes at time t, and equal to 0 otherwise
   𝑂𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝𝑖𝑡 The percentage of outstanding shares owned by institutional investors.
         𝛼𝑖𝑡 Represents firm fixed effects, capturing unobserved time-invariant firm
                     characteristics.
          𝛾𝑖𝑡 Represents year fixed effects, capturing common shocks affecting all
                   firms over time.
          𝑋𝑖𝑡 A vector of control variables, including the logarithm of market
                     capitalization (firm size), return on assets (profitability), leverage
                     (liabilities over assets), and price-to-book ratio (value effects).
        𝛽0 The intercept term.
        𝛽1 The effect of index inclusion on the dependent variable.
        𝛽2 The effect of institutional ownership on the outcome variable
                    (conditional on index inclusion).
         𝛿 The vector of coefficients associated with the control variables.
          𝑒𝑖𝑡 The error term.

To complement the panel regression analysis and assess the economic significance of the
results, a long–short portfolio approach is implemented as a robustness check. While the
panel regressions are conducted at the individual firm-year level, the long–short analysis is
conducted at the portfolio level and evaluates whether index inclusion leads to economically
meaningful return differentials. This approach provides a direct test of whether the
relationships identified in the regression framework translate into potentially exploitable
investment strategies.

For each year in the sample period, a zero-investment portfolio is constructed by taking long
positions in firms included in the index and short positions in firms outside the index. In this
setting, index inclusion is not introduced as a regression variable but is instead used to sort
firms into index and non-index portfolios. To ensure comparability, the portfolio contains an
equal number of firms on each side. When the number of index and non-index firms differs,
the smaller group determines portfolio size, and firms are selected based on market
capitalization (to enhance comparability). Within each long and short portfolio, firms are
equally weighted. Using these yearly portfolio compositions, daily long–short returns are
computed and combined into a continuous time series covering the full sample period.

Prior to constructing the long–short portfolios, the dependent variables are residualized using
panel regressions including firm fixed effects and time fixed effects, together with controls
for firm size, profitability, valuation, leverage, and market beta where applicable. The
residualized variables therefore represent the portion of returns and volatility not explained
by observable firm characteristics or fixed effects. Daily long–short spreads are then
computed as the difference between the equally weighted averages of the residualized
outcomes for index and non-index firms. Average return and CAPM alpha are annualized
using 252 trading days, while volatility and residual volatility are measured as annualized

                                                                         19
standard deviations based on firm-year return distributions. Statistical significance of the
long–short portfolio spreads is evaluated using t-tests on the daily portfolio series.

Residualization regressions before portfolio formation:

                                                              ′                      𝛼
                             𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝑋𝑖𝑡𝛿 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

                                                           ′                      𝑅
                               𝑅𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝑋𝑖𝑡𝛿 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

                                                                    ′                       𝑉𝑜𝑙
                          𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝑋𝑖𝑡𝛿 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

                                                                        ′                       𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑉𝑜𝑙
                    𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝑋𝑖𝑡𝛿 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

Long-Short Return:

                                                                         20
Annualization:

For alpha and average return:

                               𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑑 𝐿𝑆 = 𝐿𝑆𝑡 × 252

For Volatility and Residual volatility:

                             𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑑𝐿𝑆 = 𝐿𝑆𝑡 × √252

Where:

         𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑡 CAPM abnormal return (alpha) for firm i at time t, estimated before
                        the residualization regressions
           𝑅𝑖𝑡 The daily stock return for firm i at time t
       𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖𝑡 The total volatility proxy for firm i at time t, measured as the
                         absolute value of daily returns
        𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑡 The firm-specific volatility proxy for firm i at time t, measured as
                       the absolute value of CAPM alpha
          𝛽0 The regression intercept
              ′
           𝑋𝑖𝑡             The vector of control variables for firm i at time t, including market
                       capitalization, ROA, PBV, leverage
          δ The vector of coefficients associated with the control variables
            𝛼𝑖 The firm fixed effects controlling for time-invariant firm
                          characteristics
            𝛾𝑡 The time fixed effects controlling for common market-wide shocks
                        and daily market conditions
              𝛼
            𝜀𝑖𝑡             The residualized CAPM alpha after removing the effects of controls
                         and fixed effects
              𝑅
            𝜀𝑖𝑡              The residualized daily return after removing the effects of controls
                         and fixed effects
        𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 The residualized volatility after removing the effects of controls and
               𝜀𝑖𝑡
                          fixed effects
          𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑉𝑜𝑙 The residualized residual volatility after removing the effects of
                  𝜀𝑖𝑡
                         controls and fixed effects
           𝐿𝑆𝑡 The long-short portfolio spread at time t
           𝑁𝑡 The number of firms included on each side of the portfolio at time t
       𝑖 ∈ 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑡 The firms included in the long index portfolio at time t
    𝑗 ∈ 𝑁𝑜𝑛𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑡 The firms included in the short non-index portfolio at time ￼t
           ⋀ The estimated residualized outcome variable for indexed firm i at
                              𝜀𝑖𝑡
                          time t
           ⋀ The estimated residualized outcome variable for non-indexed firm j
                            𝜀𝑗𝑡
                           at time t

                                                                         21
4.0 Empirical Results
The following section contains the results of the previously outlined empirical tests, as well
as interpretations of their results.
4.1 Descriptive Statistics
The following section presents the regression outputs in table format, including portfolio
level cross-sectional estimates, panel regression estimates, and the decomposed effects of the
mediation model. For the summary statistics, please see Appendix A.

Table 1. Average institutional ownership across treatment- and control groups.

                         Mean Institutional Ownership %
 OMXS30 Stocks 56.2
 Non-constituent Swedish stocks 48.9
 S&P500 Stocks 85.6
 Non-constituent American stocks 90.4
This table shows the mean levels of institutional ownership for firms in the treatment and
control groups, separated for index inclusion and domicile. These comparisons provide pre-
regression evidence on differences in ownership structure across groups.

Table 2. Panel regression estimates for mediation model on Swedish stocks

                                 CAPM     Average   Volatility Residual
                                    Alpha      Return                Volatility
 Path A (Index -> IO) 0.1014* 0.1014* 0.1014* 0.1014*
 Path B (IO -> CV) -0.0011 -0.0013 0.0226 0.0224
 Path c’ (Index -> DV) -0.0247** -0.0219** 0.3022* 0.2599*
 Leverage 0.0079 0.0056 0.0052 -0.0057
 ROA 0.0036 0.0046. -0.0134 -0.0233*
 PBV 0.0157* 0.0158* 0.0412. 0.0331
 Market Cap                          0.0411***    0.0371**    -0.0983.      -0.120*
 Firm FE                           Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
 Time FE                           Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
   2
 R                                   0.117       0.214      0.731       0.724
This table shows the standardized coefficient estimates for the fixed-effect panel regression
models underlying the mediation analysis. Path A captures the effect of Index inclusion on
Institutional Ownership. Path B captures the effect of Institutional Ownership on our
dependent variables (Alpha, Average Return, Volatility, and Residual Volatility), when
controlling for Index Inclusion. Path c′ reflects the direct effect of Index Inclusion on each of
the dependent variables. Controlling variables are expressed with regard to their explanatory
power of the total effect.

Notes: . p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p <0.001

                                                                         23
Table 3. Panel regression estimates for mediation model on US stocks

                                CAPM     Average   Volatility Residual
                                   Alpha      Return                Volatility
 Path A (Index -> IO) -0.1289 -0.1289 -0.1289 -0.1289
 Path B (IO -> CV) -0.0002 0.0003 -0.1417 -0.1519
 Path c’ (Index -> DV) -0.0187** -0.0161** -0.0169 -0.0319
 Leverage 0.0313* 0.0276** 0.0619* 0.0527.
 ROA                          0.0105***   0.0091***  0.0291***   0.0241***
 PBV                                0.0041.      0.0032.     -0.0075      -0.0017
 Market Cap                         0.0458***   0.0397***   -0.0375.     -0.0504*
 Firm FE                          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
 Time FE                         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
    2
 R                                0.059       0.279      0.759       0.706
This table shows the standardized coefficient estimates for the fixed-effect panel regression
models underlying the mediation analysis. Path A captures the effect of Index inclusion on
Institutional Ownership. Path B captures the effect of Institutional Ownership on our
dependent variables (Alpha, Average Return, Volatility, and Residual Volatility), when
controlling for Index Inclusion. Path c′ reflects the direct effect of Index Inclusion on each of
the dependent variables. Controlling variables are expressed with regard to their explanatory
power of the total effect.

Notes: . p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p <0.001

Table 4. Long–short portfolio performance (indexed minus non-indexed stocks)

                   CAPM Alpha Average Returns Volatility Residual
                                                                               Volatility
 Swedish Sample 0.0457 0.0430 0.0156*** 0.0129***
 US Sample -0.0571 -0.0577 -0.0027*** -0.0013***
This table reports the results from the controlled long–short portfolio analysis examining the
relationship between index inclusion and stock performance. The portfolio is constructed by
taking long positions in firms included in the S&P 500 (U.S.) or OMXS30 (Sweden) and short
positions in non-index firms.

Notes: . p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p <0.001

                                                                         24
Table 5. Decomposition of total, direct, and indirect effects on Swedish stocks

                  CAPM Alpha Average        Volatility Residual
                                      Returns                         Volatility
 Direct Effect -0.0247** -0.0219** 0.3022* 0.2559*
 Indirect Effect -0.000006 -0.000009 0.000078 0.000081
 Total Effect -0.0247 -0.0219 0.1199 0.1026
This table summarizes the standardized results of our mediation analysis by decomposing the
total effect of Index Inclusion on each dependent variable into its direct (c′) and indirect (A ×
B) components. The indirect effect is computed as the product of the estimated coefficients
from Path A and Path B. The total effect equals the sum of the direct and indirect effects.

Notes: . p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p <0.001

Table 6. Decomposition of total, direct, and indirect effects on US stocks

                 CAPM Alpha Average Returns Volatility Residual Volatility
 Direct Effect -0.0187** -0.0161** -0.0203 -0.0305
 Indirect Effect 0.000003 -0.000002 0.000129 0.000095
 Total Effect -0.0187** -0.0161** -0.0202 -0.0304
This table summarizes the standardized results of our mediation analysis by decomposing the
total effect of Index Inclusion on each dependent variable into its direct (c′) and indirect (A ×
B) components. The indirect effect is computed as the product of the estimated coefficients
from Path A and Path B. The total effect equals the sum of the direct and indirect effects.

Notes: . p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p <0.001

                                                                         25
4.2 Results of Hypothesis 1: First-stage effect
As can be seen in table 1, companies in the OMXS30 appear to have slightly higher average
rates of institutional ownership than their non-index counterparts. Similarly, as suggested by
the panel regression outputs in table 2, inclusion in the OMXS30 can be seen to have a
significant and positive marginal effect on institutional ownership. This supports our theory
that Swedish mutual funds tracking the OMXS30 results in significant differences in
ownership levels between indexed and non-constituent stocks. Thus, data supports that
OMXS30 stocks exhibit significantly higher rates of institutional ownership, leading us to
reject the null hypothesis at the five percent confidence level, with regards to the Swedish
sample.

However, as also seen in table 1, the reverse relationship can be observed in the US sample –
with S&P500 companies displaying lower average rates of institutional ownership. Similarly,
table 3 indicates that inclusion in the S&P500 has no significant marginal effect on
institutional ownership levels. This result confirms the findings of recent research,
foreshadowing a possible reversal of traditional index effects. Thus, data does not support
that inclusion in the S&P500 has a significant effect on the rate of institutional ownership of
constituent stocks. This means we fail to reject the null hypothesis at the five percent
confidence level for the US sample.
4.3 Results of Hypothesis 2: Second-stage effect
Looking at the regression results in tables 2 and 3, we find no evidence of institutional
ownership exhibiting a significant standalone effect on either of our dependent variables.
This holds true for both the Swedish and the US part of the sample. Thus, data does not
support that institutional ownership would have a significant effect on both stock volatility
and performance in either market, meaning we fail to reject the null hypothesis at the five
percent confidence level for both samples.
4.3 Results of Hypothesis 3: Indirect effect
Observing the summarized effects of the mediation model in tables 5 and 6, we find no
evidence of a significant indirect mediation effect on either of our dependent variables. This
result indicates that our institutional ownership variable is not a significant driver of the
return differentials associated with traditional index effects, in either the US or the Swedish
market. Thus, data does not support that index inclusion would have a significant indirect
effect on stock volatility and performance mediated through institutional ownership.
Therefore, we fail to reject the null hypothesis at the five percent confidence level for both
samples.
4.4 Results of Hypothesis 4: Direct Effect
As indicated by the cross-sectional analysis in table 4, there appears to be significant
differences in volatility- and residual volatility between indexed and non-indexed firms in
both the Swedish and US market. These direct effects in the Swedish sample also survive the
panel regression framework (tables 5), with the addition of direct effects on abnormal- and

                                                                         26
average returns (tables 2). Thus, data supports that inclusion in the OMXS30 has a significant
direct effect on both stock volatility and performance, leading us to reject the null
hypothesis at the five percent confidence level for the Swedish sample. However, the
volatility effects observed at the portfolio level in the US sample (table 4) do not persist
under the panel regression framework, meaning that data does not support that inclusion in
the S&P500 has a significant direct effect on both stock volatility and performance. We thus
fail to reject the null hypothesis at the five percent confidence level for the US sample. For
elaborations regarding the potential endogeneity issues of the observed return effects, please
see Section 5.3.2.

Table 7. Summary of double-sided hypothesis tests

                                    Swedish Sample US Sample
 Hypothesis 1 (First-stage effect) Reject H₀ Fail to reject H₀
 Hypothesis 2 (Second-stage effect) Fail to reject H₀ Fail to reject H₀
 Hypothesis 3 (Indirect effect) Fail to reject H₀ Fail to reject H₀
 Hypothesis 4 (Direct effect) Reject H₀ Fail to reject H₀
This table summarizes the outcomes of the double-sided hypothesis tests for both the Swedish
and U.S. samples. The results indicate whether the null hypothesis (H₀) is rejected or not
rejected for each stage of the mediation framework.

4.5 On the observed effects of our Controlling Variables
Turning to the control variables, our results display some variation across the two samples.
In the US sample, leverage and ROA both exhibit positive and significant effects across all
dependent variables, as is consistent with a positive value premium. Market capitalization is
positively and significantly associated with returns, whilst exhibiting a negative relationship
to residual volatility. This pattern interferes with the risk-based explanation which would
predict the observed return premium to be accompanied by increased systemic risk. It is thus
possible that part of the observed effect is generated by alternative mechanisms – perhaps
reflecting the diversified income streams of large corporations or the increased institutional
attention afforded to larger firms, reducing non-fundamental and total price variation.

In the Swedish sample, ROA is negatively and significantly associated with residual
volatility, suggesting that more profitable firms experience less firm-specific price variation.
Price-to-book exerts a positive and significant effect on returns, as is consistent with a
positive value premium, but is not accompanied by the expected increase in systemic risk.
Thus, it is possible that the observed value effects arise from other mechanisms such as
systematic underpricing stemming from limited international investor interest. Lastly, market
capitalization is positively associated with returns whilst exhibiting a significant negative
association with residual volatility, mirroring the US finding.

                                                                         27
5.0 Discussion
The following section will seek to provide interpretations and explanations of the test results
presented in the previous section, as well as address the limitations of the analysis.
5.1 Institutional Ownership and Volatility Effects

This section discusses the observed relationship between index inclusion, institutional
ownership, and volatility.
5.1.1 OMXS30: Idiosyncratic Noise and the Absence of Ownership Effects
Looking at the results in table 2, we find support for the theory that stocks included in the
OMXS30 exhibit significantly higher rates of institutional ownership. Whilst this finding
does not in itself confirm that ownership-related index effects are transferable to a Swedish
context, it does support the validity of our identification strategy. However, as our
institutional ownership proxy variable is unable to differentiate between long- and short-term
owners, we cannot say that the observed differences in ownership dynamics stem exclusively
from the index tracking practices of Swedish mutual funds. In theory, such an effect could
also arise from active investors perceiving OMXS30 stocks to be attractive due to historical
performance, internationally diversified income streams, high liquidity, or other factors.

Whilst the identification strategy in the Swedish market is supported by a significant positive
first-stage effect, we find no evidence of significant ownership-related effects on stock
volatility in the Swedish market (tables 2 and 5). Whilst perhaps being a dramatic
explanation, the results do support that ownership-related volatility effects either do not exist
in the Swedish market, or that the institutional ownership channel previously documented in
the US operates differently in a Swedish setting. The results are also consistent with the
Swedish investing landscape to a larger extent being composed of long-term investors such as
pension funds with decade long investment horizons, infrequent rebalancing practices
(monthly rather than the daily rebalancing of ETFs) and less noise trading. Unlike ETFs who
trade continuously throughout the day in a secondary market, mutual funds trade at end of
day NAV, with their flows being determined by the amount of redemption- and subscription
orders put in by their clients before the daily cutoff. These dynamics allow for the possibility
of netting subscription and redemption orders, thereby decreasing the number of shares
having to be bought or sold (“market interactions”), hence dampening effects on volatility as
trading volumes constitute a smaller share relative to stock liquidity. Furthermore, one can
also argue that the institutional setup of the mutual fund provides additional predictability,
allowing fund managers to plan and adjust to expected in- or outflows. If known in advance,
fund managers may, for example, choose to deal with large fund flows using block trading –
bypassing the open stock market entirely, and thus not affecting volatility. Altogether, these
differences in market dynamics may be enough to negate or prevent the manifestation of
institutional-ownership effect in the Swedish market.

                                                                         28
Alternatively, one could interpret the absence of a significant indirect effect as the underlying
mechanisms linking index inclusion to stock volatility perhaps being more complex than we
initially assumed. One could also claim that institutional demand should intuitively be the
primary driver of index effects, but that our institutional ownership proxy variable is too
noisy to capture these effects. If so, we would expect institutional demand shocks to instead
exert a positive direct index effect on volatility - just like we see in the sample - given the
significantly higher rates of institutional ownership among OMXS30 stocks. This would
suggest that whatever ownership-related index effects may be present in the Swedish market
are not captured by our institutional-ownership proxy variable but operate through other
channels.

Another possible explanation behind the positive direct effects on volatility in the Swedish
sample is that indexed stocks experience increased visibility and therefore attract higher
trading volumes (Hedge and McDermott, 2003) – perhaps driven by a more heterogeneous
and speculative investor base able to amplify trading activity and volatility. Said attention is
usually accompanied by increased analyst coverage, resulting in more efficient pricing (Cai,
2007) and perhaps leading to more frequent price adjustments to new information. This
would be especially impactful on volatility if driven by large institutional investors through
active rebalancing or rapid responses to new information. Altogether, these mechanisms may
serve as an argument that heightened trading intensity may be the primary mechanism of
index-related volatility effects, rather than institutional demand shocks.

Although the cause of the positive direct effect on volatility remains unclear, it is worth
noting that it does appear to operate through the idiosyncratic volatility component. Index-
related risks manifesting themselves as idiosyncratic is also consistent with the lack of
positive effects on stock performance (table 2), as the market does not appear to price said
risk in the form of a risk premium. This finding lends support to the ETF-arbitrage hypothesis
of Ben David et al. (2018) as the absence of a risk premium may imply the absence also of
ownership-related effects in the Swedish market. However, this does not necessarily
exclude the institutional ownership mechanism as a source of the observed effects -
especially if one considers the possibility that the direct effect also captures ownership-
related index effects that our mediator fails to proxy adequately. If so, we would expect the
effects on performance and volatility to operate in the same direction, as consistent with the
existence of a risk premium. However, as the observed direct effects on stock performance
and volatility seemingly operate in opposite directions, this argument does not hold.

One may also challenge the argument of Ben David et al. (2018) by questioning the reasoning
that ownership-related risks should manifest through the systemic volatility component. Ben
David et al. (2018) argue that as all companies are to some extent owned by institutional
owners, ownership-related risks should be undiversifiable as they affect all publicly traded
stocks. However, if institutional flows are uncorrelated across Swedish funds, any observed
effects on volatility need not necessarily be systematic in nature. If different stocks have
different institutional owners, they do not necessarily experience the same or even correlated

                                                                         29
flows. Hence, their ownership-induced volatility is not necessarily correlated - making the
case for the risk being idiosyncratic and diversifiable in both markets by avoiding holding a
portfolio with highly concentrated institutional ownership. This theory is further supported by
the results of our cross-sectional analysis in table 4, which indicates that the observed
differentials in residual volatility are present also at the portfolio level – suggesting that the
observed index effects on volatility are at least partly idiosyncratic in nature. However,
even in the case of ownership-related risks manifesting themselves as increased idiosyncratic
volatility through channels not captured by our proxy variable, we would still expect the
direct effects on residual volatility and performance to be in the same direction – which is not
what we see. Thus, the argument that the absence of an observable risk premium may imply
an absence of ownership-related effects, still holds.

 5.1.2 S&P 500: Identification Failure and Proxy Limitations
As shown in Table 3, S&P500 inclusion appears to have no significant effect on institutional
ownership in the US sample. This finding undermines our identification strategy, since our
core assumption - that index membership isolates variation in institutional ownership — does
not hold. Although disappointing, this finding is in line with the saturation in institutional
ownership proposed by Greenwood and Sammon (2024). As index tracking has grown in
popularity, the largest mid-cap S&P400 stocks appear to have accumulated institutional
ownership levels comparable to the smallest S&P500 constituents. As a result, this finding
implies that the US results should be interpreted with caution as they capture general index-
related effects rather than separately identifiable ownership mechanisms.

With the identification strategy compromised, we are unable to draw conclusions about the
indirect ownership channel in the US market. Nor do we find any significant standalone
effect of institutional ownership on volatility — mirroring the Swedish result. On the surface,
this sheds doubt not only on the previous “differences in market dynamics” explanation, but
also on the quality of our institutional-ownership proxy variable, as the existence of
volatility-enhancing ownership-related effects have previously been documented in the US
market. In extension, this would also weaken the findings from the Swedish sample by
raising the possibility that non-findings in both samples are the product of a noisy proxy
variable rather than a confirmation or rejection of theory. In context, however, these results
are less surprising. If ownership-related demand shocks are the primary driver of index
volatility effects, and there is no significant difference in ownership dynamics between the
treatment- and control groups, there is no reason to expect a volatility differential either. This
explanation is strengthened by the failure to establish also a significant direct effect of
S&P500 inclusion on volatility, through channels other than institutional ownership –
pointing towards a genuine null result rather than a measurement artifact. This does, however,
not rule out the existence of such effects elsewhere in the US market, where differences in
institutional ownership and index tracking intensity are more pronounced.

                                                                         30
5.2 Index-effects on Stock Performance

As shown in table 2, no significant standalone effect can be established between institutional
ownership and stock performance in the Swedish sample. Nor do we find evidence that
institutional ownership mediates any significant relationship between index inclusion and
stock performance (table 5). These findings oppose what we would expect to see from stocks
exposed to the ownership-related demand shocks theorized by Koijen and Yogo (2019), who
argue that such shocks, if present, should cause persistent price deviations from fundamental
values (which should be observable as significant effects on CAPM alpha). However, the
absence of indirect effects on stock performance in the Swedish market is expected under a
risk-based framework where investors should not be able to realize additional returns without
taking additional risk - given that we also find no evidence of ownership-related effects on
volatility.

The insignificance of the indirect effect means that our mediation model is unable to identify
the origin of the observed effects on performance, which appear to operate exclusively
through direct channels. These direct channels represent mechanisms different than or not
captured by the institutional ownership proxy variable. Consequently, the opposite signs of
the direct effects on stock performance (negative) and volatility (positive) does constitute a
puzzling finding – with the easiest explanation simply being that the observed effects
originate from unrelated but compatible mechanism.

One framework that fits both the positive direct effects on volatility and the significant
underperformance of OMXS30 stocks, is that of an “index bubble”. As the mutual funds
tracking the OMXS30 are among the most popular in Sweden – both for retail investors and
Swedish pension schemes - stocks in the index receive steady passive inflows. With stock
demand curves not being perfectly inelastic, indiscriminate buying creates non-fundamental
demand pressure on index constituents - inflating prices above fundamentals and generating
excess co-movement, as consistent with the findings of Wurgler (2010). This co-movement
manifests itself through additional non-fundamental, idiosyncratic volatility as prices
disconnect from fundamentals – decreasing future expected returns. Meanwhile, firms outside
the index who do not experience the same indiscriminate buying pressure appear cheap and
exhibit higher relative returns. Thus, investors in OMXS30 stocks experience (unpriced)
flow-induced idiosyncratic volatility but lower returns as they consistently buy shares that
trade at a “passive ownership premium”. This “passive ownership premium”, not captured
within the limitations of the CAPM or our controlling variables, also offers a possible
explanation of the observed negative Alpha of OMXS30 stocks. This finding is compatible
with those of Koijen and Yogo (2019), supporting the theory that institutional demand may
cause persistent deviations from fundamental values.

Whilst fitting for the Swedish part of the sample, the “index bubble” explanation does not
hold for the US part of the sample. This is partly because both the treatment- and control
group are saturated with institutional ownership, and because the negative direct effects on

                                                                         31
stock performance are not accompanied by any significant effects on volatility at the panel
regression level. An alternative explanation for the relative underperformance of index
constituents is therefore that our firm fixed effects do not fully account for the possible
differences in dividend policy across the treatment- and control groups in both markets.
Taking the OMXS30 as an example, its constituent stocks are typically large and mature
firms with stable cash flows, meaning dividends are likely to constitute a larger share of total
shareholder return. In contrast, smaller, non-index firms tend to retain a larger share of their
earnings to finance growth and therefore often pay little to no dividends – instead relying on
capital gains to satisfy equity holders. If stock performance is measured solely based on price
appreciation, the exclusion of dividend distributions risks biasing the estimations of average-
and abnormal returns. Specifically, firms that distribute a larger share of returns through
dividends may appear to underperform relative to firms that primarily generate returns
through capital gains – when really displaying comparable total returns (defined as the sum of
price appreciation and dividend yield). This implies that the observed underperformance of
indexed firms could, at least partially, be an artifact of measurement and firm heterogeneity
rather than an effect of index inclusion itself. For non-index firms (especially growth stocks),
where dividends are presumably lower, stock price changes constitute a closer approximation
of total shareholder returns. As a result, comparisons based solely on price returns may
overstate the relative performance of these firms.

Alternative causes of the negative direct effects on stock performance include greater
visibility resulting in higher trading volumes, tighter bid-ask spreads and lower liquidity
premiums (Hedge and McDermott, 2003), greater analyst coverage resulting in more efficient
pricing (Cai, 2007), or (perhaps most likely) the inherent endogeneity issues of index
construction.

                                                                         32
5.3 Limitations and Implications for interpretation

This section outlines some of the key limitations of the study's research design — particularly
the noisy institutional ownership proxy, issues with beta estimation, as well as the inherent
endogeneity concerns associated with the study of index effects. We also discuss how these
constraints limit our interpretations of the empirical results.
5.3.1 On limitations of the Proxy, Beta Estimation and Omitted Variables
Before making any conclusions regarding the existence of ownership-related effects in the
Swedish market, there are several limitations of the analysis that one needs to consider. For
example, an alternative explanation for our lack of observable indirect effects is that what we
are observing is the product of measurement issues rather than a confirmation or rejection of
theory. As previously discussed, the ownership data used in the analysis is fundamentally
flawed, with excessive noise being introduced both through unclear reporting practices and
the lack of separation between long-term block holders and short-term flow-generating
owners. These issues could possibly have interfered with the test results, giving the
appearance of a non-existent effect of institutional ownership on stock volatility and
performance. Even in the case of the data not posing any problems, one may still question if
institutional ownership is a reliable proxy for the trading flows thought to drive the theorized
effect. Whilst easily accessible for collection, institutional ownership levels are not
synonymous with trading flows or rebalancing activity – which would both constitute better
proxies for the demand shocks we seek to study, but which are also much more difficult to
gather data on as it is generally kept private by the institutions themselves. This explanation
is further supported by the lack of significant effects between institutional ownership and our
dependent variables also in the US part of the sample, in a market where the proxied demand
shock effects have previously been shown to exist. Thus, the insignificant total effect of our
mediation model (on the Swedish sample) may serve as guidance for future research on the
topic to consider alternative proxies for the relevant demand shocks.

Further concerns relate to the reliability of the estimated beta coefficients. The summary
statistics indicate that the average beta for OMXS30 stocks is approximately 0.67. While this
may be considered reasonable for index constituents (albeit at the lower end), given that these
firms are generally stable companies that tend to exhibit lower volatility than the overall
market, the average beta of stocks outside the index is unexpectedly low at 0.63. In contrast,
the U.S. sample displays an average beta of approximately 1.0 for index constituents and 1.2
for non-index constituents. This raises concerns regarding whether daily annualized beta is an
appropriate measure of systematic risk in this context – with daily return data perhaps
introducing a considerable degree of noise that biases the beta estimates downward. At the
same time, extending the estimation window (e.g., by using weekly or monthly data) would
reduce the number of observations, potentially limiting statistical power given the sample
size and time horizon. Consequently, it is plausible that part of the estimated direct index
effects on CAPM alpha captures systematic risk that is not adequately reflected in the beta
measure.

                                                                         33
Moreover, since the analysis relies on the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), the
estimated Alpha may partly reflect omitted risk factors. Employing multifactor models, such
as the Fama–French five-factor model, could potentially reclassify part of the estimated alpha
as compensation for additional sources of systematic risk. Although our regressions include
several firm-level controls, firm fixed effects and time fixed effects, omitted time-varying
firm characteristics such as changes in liquidity, dividend policy or analyst coverage, may
still bias the estimated effects. In the presence of omitted variables, variation attributable to
unobserved factors may incorrectly be attributed to our index inclusion dummy variable –
giving the impression of real index effects. Consequently, part of the estimated direct effect
of index inclusion may reflect unobserved factors correlated with both index membership and
stock outcomes, rather than index inclusion itself.

5.3.2 Endogeneity Issues and Unreliable Performance-related Index Effects
Perhaps most importantly, one should not put too much trust in the observed index effects on
stock performance, in neither the US nor the Swedish sample. This is due to the endogeneity
issues inherent to the composition and construction of the S&P500 and OMXS30 indexes.
This is most striking in the case of the S&P500 where index inclusion or exclusion is not
rule-based, but rather decided by a committee who make alterations to the index when
deemed necessary due to mergers, delistings or companies growing to meet market cap and
profitability thresholds (Corporate Finance Institute, 2020). Thus, on the margin, the
composition of the S&P500 is essentially a result of active stock picking practices – with the
committee typically adding stocks following a period of strong performance and deleting
them after bad runs. This introduces an “index lag” effect where poorly performing stocks are
kept inside the S&P500 whilst firms just outside the index may be growing and approaching
inclusion. Due to this index inertia, such firms are not immediately reclassified, leading to a
temporary mismatch between firm fundamentals and index membership. As a result, the non-
index control group may contain relatively stronger firms compared to the weakest index
constituents, biasing the estimated index effect in the negative direction (which is what we
see in the US sample). Thus, the smallest stocks in the S&P500 – consisting of companies in
decline or recently added mean reverting rising stars - are seen to underperform relative to
their non-incumbent equivalents, with the observed return differences reflecting selection
timing (picking post-peak winners and dropping pre-recovery losers) rather than a causal
relationship between index inclusion and stock performance. Put in simpler terms: the
selection process of the committee is endogenous to the past performance we seek to measure
– making the causality between index inclusion and stock performance unclear.

                                                                         34
In contrast, the rule-based construction of the OMXS30 provides more plausibly exogenous
variation in index membership, reducing endogeneity concerns. However, as stocks do still
enter the index after periods of strong performance where they appreciate to meet market cap
thresholds, the Swedish sample is not free from endogeneity issues. Furthermore, the
anomalous behavior of our control variables, where established risk premiums are not
accompanied by expected volatility effects, further corroborates endogeneity concerns also in
the Swedish sample.

On the other hand, the same endogeneity issues (while still present to some extent) are less
severe in the case of the observed index effects on volatility. Intuitively, the S&P500
committee is less likely to make inclusion- and exclusion decisions based on historical
volatility, with the OMXS30 market-cap rule being largely unrelated to past volatility
measurements. Therefore, the significant direct effects on volatility and residual volatility
observed in both the Swedish and the US sample still carry credibility.

Ultimately, we are unable to conclude that inclusion in the S&P500 or the OMXS30 has
a causal effect on stock performance, as any observed effect may be produced or skewed
by issues of endogeneity. This also means that any observed return effects should be
interpreted with considerable caution.

5.3.3 Implications for Further Study
If one wishes to determine which out of the competing explanations presented in this paper is
the most valid, one could start with attempting to decompose institutional owners by investor
type and run the same panel regressions using the “cleaned” ownership data, and with
additional control variables (such as liquidity or dividend policy). If both types of investors
show no significant effects on stock performance, this would suggest that institutional-
ownership effects are truly absent in the Swedish market and that the ETF-arbitrage
mechanism likely is central to ownership-related index effects. However, when implementing
such a methodology one would have to pay close attention to how one categorizes single
institutional investors, as this procedure risks being highly subjective and possibly skewing
the results. If one has access to the data, one could and should of course substitute
institutional ownership for a more fitting proxy variable.

Future research could also improve the accuracy of beta estimates by reducing noise in return
data and increasing the number of observations used in estimation. One approach would be to
use lower-frequency data, such as weekly, monthly, or yearly returns, which tend to smooth
out short-term fluctuations present in daily data. In addition, applying rolling estimation
windows over several years would allow beta to vary over time while not losing too many
observations. However, lower-frequency data would require a longer sample period in order
to maintain statistical precision. Alternatively, expanding the cross-section of firms could
further improve statistical precision. In the Swedish context, this is challenging, as the

                                                                         35
OMXS30 represents the most relevant index but includes a limited number of firms,
restricting the size of comparable groups.

As for combatting the endogeneity issues of index effects on stock performance, one could
consider adopting a “purer” regression discontinuity design (RDD) by studying firms just
around the market cap cutoff of the OMXS30 and a similar rule-based index in the US (such
as the Russel 2000). By comparing stocks just above and below the threshold at rebalancing
dates, you get groups that are near-identical in all relevant characteristics, making index
membership as good as randomly assigned. However, even this approach is not completely
free from endogeneity issues as the threshold itself is endogenous to past performance.
Similarly, an event study design - although able to isolate the immediate market response of
index inclusion - would still struggle with issues of endogeneity as the studied
inclusion/exclusion events are not only endogenous to past performance but also anticipated
by the market. Thus, regardless of research design or use of firm- and time fixed effects, the
endogeneity issues inherent to the study of index effects are inescapable and to be considered
a shared limitation of the index effect literature.

                                                                         36
5.4 The Exploitability of the observed Index Effects
Whilst the observed index effects on stock performance (tables 2 and 3) suffer from issues of
endogeneity, this does not necessarily mean the effects are not real or unexploitable – only
that we cannot prove their underlying cause. Thus, the question of whether one can trade on
the observed effects becomes highly relevant to seasoned investors.

The most intuitive way of capitalizing on return differentials between indexed stocks and
non-constituents would be to construct a long-short portfolio. As both the treatment group
portfolio and the control group portfolio should contain a mix of “rising stars” and “fallen
giants”, the samples are not necessarily fraught with issues of survivorship bias. Instead,
investors could in theory realize any potential return differentials simply by holding the
largest 30 stocks outside of the index, shorting the portfolio of indexed stocks, and
rebalancing every year. Providing that the treatment and control groups have similar betas, a
simple long-short portfolio would provide a market neutral position, isolating the Alpha
component. Although, given the significant transaction costs of long-short strategies (e.g.
bid-ask spreads, commissions and borrowing costs), such procedures are more fit for a larger
hedge fund than for the retail investor.

However, whilst possible in theory, the results of our cross-sectional analysis in table 4
(mimicking the aforementioned long-short portfolio strategy) is not able to capitalize on the
return differentials observed in our panel regressions (tables 2 and 3) – implying that the
observed return differentials may be a result of backward-looking selection bias or hindsight
bias on the individual company level. This would mean that replicating the observed
abnormal returns would not be as simple as just reversing our long-short portfolio. Rather,
one´s ability to exploit the observed index effects would rely on one's capacity to consistently
pinpoint the rising stars outside of the indexes, as well as declining index incumbents', ex-
ante - using only the information available at the time of the investment. Even if within the
realm of possibility for advanced quantitative traders, such sophisticated investors would
soon realize that this long-short strategy would be very similar to simply buying promising
mid-cap growth stocks with positive momentum and increasing profitability. Thus, even if
the observed return effects were to be exploitable in practice, there would be little meaningful
difference between such a strategy and existing factor investing frameworks. With that said,
since the cross-sectional framework of the long-short portfolio analysis relies on substantially
fewer observations, the lack of significant portfolio level return effects may also reasonably
be attributed to a lack of statistical power rather than the inability to replicate said effects on a
portfolio level. The possibility and difficulty of replicating the observed abnormal returns
thus remains unclear.

                                                                         37
Whilst index membership does not constitute a return anomaly at the portfolio level in either
market, the robustness of the observed index effects on volatility in the Swedish market -
surviving both cross-sectional and panel regression analysis - indicates that the observed
effect is real and not a product of a subpar test methodology, unreliable data or inherent
sample biases. For the passive investor, this is highly important as it implies that OMXS30
stocks may carry a hidden, unpriced “volatility cost” in the form of higher idiosyncratic
volatility.

At first glance, one could attribute these effects to a lack of diversification of the OMXS30
index. If so, this would imply that the “exploitability” of the observed index effects in the
Swedish market may have less to do with realizing additional returns but rather avoiding
unnecessary volatility by switching to a broader index such as the OMXSPI.

However, the fact that these volatility differentials persist also at the individual company
level under the panel regression framework (table 2) indicates that the observed effects are
not purely a product of subpar portfolio level diversification. Instead, this indicates that the
observed volatility differentials should (in theory) be exploited by investors using options
trading. More specifically, if individual stocks in the OMXS30 exhibit higher realized
volatility than the implied volatility of options on the market – said options may be mispriced
and provide for an arbitrage opportunity. Whilst this relationship is likely too obvious to not
be efficiently priced by the options market, investors with knowledge of future fund flows (if
causing said volatility differentials) could in theory profit from trading on the difference
between realized- and implied volatility. In practice, this would likely involve buying
straddles on high volatility stocks in the OMXS30, pairs-trading stocks inside and outside the
OMXS30, or mean reversion strategies. The validity of this strategy is further supported by
the observed volatility differentials not being subject to the same level of endogeneity issues
as the return effects in the US market. One is however unable to use options to exploit
portfolio-level volatility differentials, as the availability of options trading is generally
restricted to single stocks, indexes and ETFs (not our constructed control group).
Furthermore, given the small size of the OMXS30, the general ambiguity surrounding the
causal mechanism, and the general efficiency of the options market, such strategies are
unlikely to be worthwhile pursuing in the long run – especially when also factoring in
transaction- and opportunity costs.

Ultimately, the advice to the passive investor becomes to not attempt to exploit the observed
index effects but rather remain a passive investor.

                                                                         38
6.0 Conclusion
This paper examines if institutional fund flows, driven by index membership, affects stock
volatility and performance in the Swedish equity market. Whilst such effects have previously
been documented in the US market, it remained unknown if they are present also in a
Swedish, mutual-fund dominated setting.

Our study employs a mediation analysis framework to separate index effects operating
through the institutional ownership channel, from those arising from alternative mechanisms.
The analysis draws on two panel datasets — the OMXS30 and the 30 largest companies
outside of the index, and the smallest S&P500 constituents alongside the largest non-
constituents — observed over the period January 2016 to December 2025.

Our study finds no evidence of ownership-related effects on stock volatility or
performance in the Swedish market, supporting the theory of Ben David et al. (2018) that
the ETF arbitrage mechanism may be central to the materialization of such effects. This
argument is strengthened by the lack of an observable risk premium and the fact that the
observed direct effects on volatility operate, at least partially, through the idiosyncratic
volatility component. The latter suggests the presence of alternative index-effect mechanisms,
as previous literature theorizes ownership-related index risks to be systematic in nature. The
most important contribution of this paper is therefore a non-finding: with the absence of
evidence for ownership-related effects in the Swedish market pointing to that US-based
index effect theory may not be directly transferable to markets with lower ETF
penetration. However, we still cannot rule out the possibility that these effects do exist but
are not captured by our noisy institutional ownership proxy variable.

For our US sample, the identification strategy breaks down, with the control group exhibiting
higher levels of institutional ownership than the S&P500 treatment group, rendering causal
inference impossible.

Because of the endogeneity issues inherent to index construction, we are unable to make any
causal inferences regarding performance-related index effects in either market. Nevertheless,
differences in dividend policy and liquidity premiums, potential index bubble dynamics or
simple hindsight bias, offer plausible alternative explanations for the relative
underperformance of stocks in the OMXS30 and S&P500.

Whilst unable to pinpoint the cause of the observed index effects, the endogeneity issues do
not imply that the observed effects cannot be exploited by investors. However, even if clever
stock picking practices could in theory serve as the basis for replicating observed abnormal
returns, such strategies would likely offer little incremental value over established factor
investing approaches. Seasoned investors could also look to use options to exploit the
observed volatility differentials in the Swedish market (which are also subject to less
endogeneity issues). However, we deem it unlikely for such a strategy to be profitable in the
long run considering the general efficiency of the options market.

With the primary limitations of the study lying in the endogeneity issues of index
construction, concerns regarding beta estimation and the quality of the institutional ownership
                                                                         39
proxy variable, future research on the topic should prioritize seeking a more appropriate
proxy variable (for example direct fund-flow data, if accessible) whilst also considering
making alterations to our RDD-style research design. Such a study may also seek to
decompose ownership data by investor type – separating long term holders from flow
inducing traders. However, even this “ideal” setup would still be unable to fully escape issues
of endogeneity as index inclusion is inevitably endogenous to past performance.

For the passive investor, the most important takeaway is one of awareness rather than action:
that ownership-related index effects appear neither detectable nor exploitable in the Swedish
market. However, the evidence of genuinely higher volatility and residual volatility among
OMXS30 constituents at both the firm and portfolio level suggests that passive investors with
concentrated exposure to the Swedish market should be aware of the added price variation
associated with index membership — even if its origin and exploitability remain open
questions.

                                                                         40
References

Ben-David, I., Franzoni, F. and Moussawi, R. (2018). Do ETFs increase volatility? Journal of
Finance, 73(6), pp. 2471–2535.

Brown, D., David C., Davies, S.W., and Ringgenberg, M. (2021). ETF arbitrage, non-
fundamental demand, and return predictability, Review of Finance, 25(4), pp. 937–972.

Cai, J. (2007). What's in the news? Information content of S&P 500 additions. Financial
Management, 36(3), pp. 113–124.

Capital IQ (n.d.). [online] S&P Global. Available at: https://www.capitaliq.com/ [Accessed:
2026-03-05].

Chen, H., Noronha, G. and Singal, V. (2004). The price response to S&P 500 index additions
and deletions: Evidence of asymmetry and a new explanation. Journal of Finance, 59(4), pp.
1901–1929.

Corporate Finance Institute (2020). S&P 500 – companies included, and criteria for
inclusion. [Online] Available at: S&P 500 - Companies Included, and Criteria for Inclusion
[Accessed: 2026-03-13].

Dahlquist, M. and Robertsson, G. (2001). Direct foreign ownership, institutional investors,
and firm characteristics. Journal of Financial Economics, 59(3), pp. 413–440.

De Long, J., Shleifer, A., Summers, L. and Waldmann, R. (1990). Noise trader risk in
financial markets. Journal of Political Economy, 98(4), pp. 703–738.

Fama, E.F. (1970). Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work. Journal
of Finance, 25(2), pp. 383–417.

Greenwood, R.M. and Sammon, M. (2024). The disappearing index effect. Journal of
Finance, 80(2), pp. 657–698.

Harris, L. and Gurel, E. (1986), Price and volume effects associated with changes in the S&P
500 list: New evidence for the existence of price pressures. Journal of Finance, 41(4), pp.
815–829.

Hedge, S. and McDermott, J.B. (2003). The liquidity effects of revisions to the S&P 500
index: An empirical analysis. Journal of Financial Markets, 6(3), pp. 413–459.

Investing.com (n.d.). OMX Stockholm 30 companies stock list. [online] Available at: OMX
Stockholm 30 Companies Stock List - Investing.com [Accessed: 2026-03-13].

                                                                         41
Koijen, R. and Yogo, M. (2019). A demand system approach to asset pricing. Journal of
Political Economy, 127(4), pp. 1475–1515.

Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. Journal of Finance, 7(1), pp. 77–91.

Modigliani, F. and Miller, M.H. (1958). The cost of capital, corporation finance and the
theory of investment. American Economic Review, 48(3), pp. 261–297.

Morningstar (2025). Kommer ETF:er någonsin ta fart i Sverige? [online] Morningstar
Sverige. Available at: Kommer ETF:er någonsin ta fart i Sverige? | Morningstar Sverige
[Accessed: 2026-04-20].

Pineify (n.d.). Historical S&P 500 changes – free index composition history. [online]
Available at: Historical S&P 500 Changes - Free Index Composition History | Pineify
[Accessed: 2026-04-18].

Sharpe, W.F. (1964). Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of
risk. Journal of Finance, 19(3), pp. 425–442.

Shleifer, A. (1986). Do demand curves for stocks slope down? Journal of Finance, 41(3), pp.
579–590.

Statistics Sweden (n.d.). A strong stock market year increased equity wealth. [online]
Available at: A strong stock market year increased equity wealth [Accessed: 2026-04-18].

Stock Analysis (n.d.). List of stocks on the Nasdaq Stockholm (STO) in Sweden. [online]
Available at: List of Stocks on the Nasdaq Stockholm (STO) in Sweden [Accessed: 2026-03-
11].

Vijh, A.M. and Wang, J. (2022). Negative returns on addition to the S&P 500 index and
positive returns on deletion? New evidence on the attractiveness of S&P500 versus S&P400
indexes. Financial Management, 51(4), pp. 1127-1164.

Wikipedia (n.d.). OMXS30. [online] Available at: https://sv.wikipedia.org/wiki/OMXS30
[Accessed: 2026-03-10].

Wurgler, J. (2010). On the economic consequences of index-linked investing. NBER Working
Paper No. 16376.

                                                                         42
AI declaration

This thesis has made use of artificial intelligence (ChatGPT 5.3 and Claude Sonnet 4.6) tools
as a supporting resource during the research process. Specifically, AI has been used to assist
in writing and refining code used for empirical analysis, as well as for improving the clarity
and grammatical correctness of the written text.

All analytical decisions, model specifications, interpretation of results, and final conclusions
are the author’s own. The use of AI has been limited to technical assistance and language
refinement, and the author takes full responsibility for the content, accuracy, and integrity of
the work.

                                                                         43
Appendix A: Summary statistics

This appendix contains summary statistics tables used to convert standardized regression
estimates to raw regression outputs.

Table A1. Summary statistics for Swedish sample stocks split Index – Non-index

 Group Variable Mean SD n
 Index CAPM Alpha 0.0025 4.94 52917
 Non-index CAPM Alpha 0.151 5.15 60799
 Index Avg_Return 0.063 5.36 52917
 Non-index Avg_Return 0.206 5.50 60799
 Index Beta 0.673 0.285 52917
 Non-index Beta 0.614 0.286 60799
 Index Volatility 0.308 0.259 52917
 Non-index Volatility 0.329 0.139 60799
 Index Res_Volatility 0.192 0.245 52917
 Non-index Res_Volatility 0.218 0.241 60799
 Index Inst_Own 56.2 15.5 52917
 Non-index Inst_Own 48.9 22.0 60799
 Index MarketCap 256174. 342387 52917
 Non-Index MarketCap 70067. 63134 60799
 Index ROA 0.0564 0.0583 52917
 Non-Index ROA 0.0628 0.0517 60799
 Index Leverage 0.531 0.188 52917
 Non-Index Leverage 0.509 0.149 60799
 Index PBV 3.23 2.12 52917
 Non-Index PBV 4.94 6.17 60799
This table shows the mean, standard variation, and number of observations for the main
variables of the Swedish sample. The variables are split between index constituents and non-
index constituents.

                                                                         44
Table A2. Summary statistics for US sample stocks split Index – Non-index

 Group Variable Mean SD n
 Index CAPM Alpha -0.03 4.84 65091
 Non-index CAPM Alpha 0.103 6.39 63576
 Index Avg_Return 0.0846 5.76 65091
 Non-index Avg_Return 0.234 7.32 63576
 Index Beta 1.00 0.371 65091
 Non-index Beta 1.19 0.339 63576
 Index Volatility 0.235 0.276 65091
 Non-index Volatility 0.297 0.352 63576
 Index Res_Volatility 0.194 0.235 65091
 Non-index Res_Volatility 0.251 0.314 63576
 Index Inst_Own 85.6 16.6 65091
 Non-index Inst_Own 90.4 15.1 63576
 Index MarketCap 13368. 6885. 65091
 Non-Index MarketCap 7525. 6139. 63576
 Index ROA 0.0609 0.0439 65091
 Non-Index ROA 0.0800 0.627 63576
 Index Leverage 0.606 0.198 65091
 Non-Index Leverage 0.544 0.205 63576
 Index PBV 8.83 22.5 65091
 Non-Index PBV 4.81 7.36 63576
This table shows the mean, standard deviation, and number of observations for the main
variables of the US sample. The variables are split between index constituents and non-index
constituents.

Table A3. Summary statistics for Swedish sample stocks without index split

 Variable Mean SD n
 CAPM Alpha 0.0818 5.06 113716
 Avg_Return 0.140 5.44 113716
 Beta 0.641 0.287 113716
 Volatility 0.319 0.124 113716
 Res_Volatility 0.292 0.128 113716
 Inst_Own 52.3 19.6 113716
 MarketCap 156671. 255538. 113716
 ROA 0.0599 0.0549 113716
 Leverage 0.520 0.169 113716
 PBV 4.15 4.82 113716
This table shows the mean, standard deviation, and number of observations for the main
variables of the Swedish sample. The table does not split the firms between index and non-
index constituents. Market Cap in millions of SEK

                                                                         45
Table A4. Summary statistics for US sample stocks without index split

 Variable Mean SD n
 CAPM Alpha 0.0356 5.66 128667
 Avg_Return 0.159 6.58 128667
 Beta 1.10 0.367 128667
 Volatility 0.266 0.318 128667
 Res_Volatility 0.222 0.278 128667
 Inst_Own 88.0 16.0 128667
 MarketCap 10481. 7151. 128667
 ROA 0.0704 0.442 128667
 Leverage 0.575 0.204 128667
 PBV 6.84 17.0 128667
This table shows the mean, standard deviation, and number of observations for the main
variables of the US sample. The table does not split the firms between index and non-index
constituents. MarketCap in millions of USD.

Table A5. Panel regression estimates for mediation model on Swedish stocks (raw
numbers)

                                CAPM     Average   Volatility Residual
                                   Alpha      Return                Volatility
 Path A (Index -> IO) 3.8287* 3.8287* 3.8287* 3.8287*
 Path B (IO -> CV) -0.0003 -0.0004 0.0005 0.0005
 Path c’ (Index -> DV) -0.2743** -0.2581** 0.0989* 0.0849*
 Leverage 0.2263 0.1705 0.0314 0.0095
 ROA                                0.3486      0.4614     -0.1196     -0.1741*
 PBV                            0.0185*     0.0198*     0.0030      0.0027
 Market Cap                        0.2030***   0.1937***   -0.0411*     -0.0462*
 Firm FE                          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
 Time FE                         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
    2
 R                                0.117       0.214      0.731       0.724
This table shows the raw coefficient estimates for the fixed-effect panel regression models
underlying the mediation analysis. Path A captures the effect of Index inclusion on
Institutional Ownership. Path B captures the effect of Institutional Ownership on our
dependent variables (Alpha, Average Return, Volatility, and Residual Volatility), when
controlling for Index Inclusion. Path c′ reflects the direct effect of Index Inclusion on each of
the dependent variables. Controlling variables are expressed with regard to their explanatory
power of the total effect.

                                                                         47
Table A6. Panel regression estimates for mediation model on US stocks (raw numbers)

                                CAPM     Average   Volatility Residual
                                   Alpha      Return                Volatility
 Path A (Index -> IO) -4.1612 -4.1612 -4.1612 -4.1612
 Path B (IO -> CV) -0.0001 0.0001 -0.0014 -0.0013
 Path c’ (Index -> DV) -0.2149** -0.2148** -0.0056 -0.0090
 Leverage 0.8110* 0.8307** 0.1554* 0.1180*
 ROA                          0.0795***   0.0804***  0.0130***   0.0085**
 PBV                               0.0014.      0.0013.     -0.0002      0.0000
 Market Cap                         0.3540***   0.3568***    -0.0217.      -0.0240.
 Firm FE                          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
 Time FE                         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
    2
 R                                0.059       0.279      0.759       0.706
This table shows the raw coefficient estimates for the fixed-effect panel regression models
underlying the mediation analysis. Path A captures the effect of Index inclusion on
Institutional Ownership. Path B captures the effect of Institutional Ownership on our
dependent variables (Alpha, Average Return, Volatility, and Residual Volatility), when
controlling for Index Inclusion. Path c′ reflects the direct effect of Index Inclusion on each of
the dependent variables. Controlling variables are expressed with regard to their explanatory
power of the total effect.

                                                                         48