ACTIVE  AND  TOTAL
REACHING FOR YIELD

RISK-TAKING IN  INVESTMENT GRADE CORPORATE BOND
MUTUAL FUNDS

ROBIN INSEL

MARTIN SANDBERG

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2026
Active and  Total Reaching for Yield: Risk-Taking  in  Investment Grade  Corporate
Bond Mutual Funds

Abstract:

   The tendency of increasing the riskiness of one’s investment when interest rates drop
   is referred to as  “reaching for yield”.  We study  this phenomenon  among U.S.
   investment grade corporate bond mutual funds. While we do find evidence of an
   inverse relation between interest rates  and  portfolio riskiness, consistent with funds
   reaching for yield, we find no evidence of it being  caused by active  trading decisions
   made by the fund manager. We further examine if expense ratios pressure  fund
   managers to reach for yield in times of low or decreasing interest rates,  to maintain a
   positive net return. Our analysis reveals a positive relationship between  expense
   ratios  and reaching for yield, but no evidence of expense ratios moderating how fund
   managers react to interest rates for the full time  period. However, there is  evidence of
   funds with higher  expense ratios  reaching for yield more in response to interest rate
   drops during  2019-2021,  a period  ridden by decreasing and later  near-zero  interest
   rates.  There are no major differences between retail and non-retail funds or between
   index and non-index funds, with regards to reaching for yield.

Keywords:

   Reaching for yield, Corporate bond  mutual  funds, Interest rates, Expense ratio, Risk-
   taking

Authors:

   Robin Insel  (26118)
   Martin Sandberg  (25927)

Tutor:

   Alvin Chen,  Assistant Professor, Department of  Finance

Examiner:

   Ramin Baghai, Professor, Department of  Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
©  Robin Insel and Martin Sandberg, 2026

                                   1
1. Introduction

Fixed income markets went through a tumultuous period between 2018–2024. Interest rates
fell rapidly as COVID-19 hit the world, only to rise quickly following the Russian invasion of
Ukraine. This period of drastic changes stands in sharp contrast to the previous decade, during
which interest rates remained at unprecedented low levels. While the low interest rate regime
was deemed necessary, policy makers worried that it could undermine financial stability, due
to incentivizing investors and portfolio managers who are dissatisfied with low returns to take
on excessive risk, in an attempt to “reach for yield” (Bernanke, 2013a; Bernanke 2013b;
Stein, 2013). Empirical evidence provides support to the concern that there is a relationship
between risk-taking and interest rates. For instance, Dell’Ariccia et al. (2017) find evidence
that the riskiness of new loans issued by banks increase as interest rates drop.

We refer to the phenomenon of increasing the riskiness of one's investments when interest
rates drop as reaching for yield (henceforth RFY). Previous literature has documented RFY
due to institutional frictions among a multitude of investors, such as insurance companies
(Becker and Ivashina, 2015) and U.S. pension funds (Andonov et al., 2017). Evidence of RFY
among retail investors, for whom institutional frictions are absent, has also been documented
(Gomes et al., 2025; Lian et al., 2019). Consistent with retail investors’ desire for RFY, Choi
and Kronlund (2018) find that corporate bond mutual funds do RFY and that doing so attracts
higher capital inflows. However, prior literature has not examined whether the relationship
between RFY and interest rates found in mutual funds is caused by managers’ active trading
or market-wide patterns outside of the manager’s control.

In this paper, we further examine the existence and determinants of RFY in U.S. investment
grade corporate bond mutual funds. We largely follow the method used by Choi and
Kronlund (2018), measuring RFY as the value weighted average deviation of the bid yields of
all corporate bonds held by a fund, from maturity and coupon frequency matched Treasuries.
Our study contributes to the identified research gap by studying both the total level of RFY
        Total                                                     Active
(RFY   ) and the active change in RFY (RFY    ), allowing us to examine to what extent
RFY is driven by active portfolio reallocation. The decomposition is based on the method
used by Gomes et al. (2025). This empirical design allows us to examine whether corporate
bond mutual funds RFY and what mechanisms drive this behaviour, but also to what extent
                                                                                                                          Total
RFY is caused by active portfolio rebalancing performed by the fund manager. If RFY
                                                Active                                   Total
moves with interest rates, even when RFY    does not, it indicates that RFY   is driven by
market-wide patterns outside of the fund manager’s control.

                                                                              Total           Active
If corporate bond mutual funds engage in RFY, we expect both RFY    and RFY    to be
inversely related to the interest rate level and change respectively. We find that there indeed is
                                          Total
a negative relationship between RFY    and the interest rate level. This implies that corporate
bond mutual funds do increase the riskiness of their holdings as interest rates fall, which is in
line with the findings in prior literature (Choi and Kronlund, 2018; Di Maggio and
Kacperczyk, 2017). However, neither the interest rate level, nor the change in the interest rate
                                                Active
level is negatively related to RFY    . In fact, there is a somewhat significant positive
                                                                             Active
relationship between the interest rate change and RFY    . This pattern holds even when we
limit the sample to only non-index funds or retail funds. The stark contrast between the
findings for our two measures of RFY suggest that the identified relationship between
     Total
RFY   and the interest rate level is not necessarily driven by active trading decisions made
by the fund manager, but may reflect market-wide price or spread movements.

                                     2
Prior literature has also documented a relationship between expense ratios and RFY. During
the unprecedentedly low interest rate following the 2008 financial crisis, money market funds
had their returns net of fees squeezed by the compressed fixed income returns, leading to
them reducing fees and RFY in order to maintain positive net returns (Di Maggio and
Kacperczyk, 2017). Similarly, Chodorow-Reich (2014) finds that high-cost money market
funds took on more risk when interest rates fell post financial crisis, in an attempt to generate
higher returns. The relationship between expense ratios and corporate bond mutual funds is
not as extensively studied. That said, Choi and Kronlund (2018) find a similar pressure of low
interest rates on expense ratios, which results in corporate bond funds being more likely to
decrease their fees when interest rates are low. Furthermore, when using expense ratio as a
control variable, they find a strong positive relationship between expense ratios and RFY. Our
paper contributes to the understanding of how expense ratios impact corporate bond mutual
funds’ behaviour, by studying whether expense ratios moderate the relationship between the
interest rate and RFY, such that more expensive funds engage more in RFY.

Consistent with our expectations and prior literature, we document a positive relationship
                                              Total
between expense ratios and RFY   . We find no relation between expense ratios and
      Active
RFY    , which is in line with our expectations as we do not expect more expensive funds to
continuously increase the riskiness of their holdings. Furthermore, our regressions show no
significant interaction effects between the expense ratio and the interest rate. Considering this,
                                                                                             Total
a more cautious interpretation of the relationship between expense ratio and RFY    is that
funds with higher expense ratios may always hold corporate bonds with higher yields, rather
than a fee pressure resulting in increased sensitivity to the interest rate, as there is a lack of
evidence that they actively reallocate their portfolio in response to changes in interest rate
level.

A potential concern with our method is that RFY could also be caused by the fund managers’
skill in identifying underpriced bonds, due to the negative relationship between bond prices
and bond yields. If higher expense ratios are associated with superior security selection skills,
the identified relationship between RFY and expense ratios could be due to high-cost funds’
superior ability to identify underpriced bonds, resulting in a higher portfolio yield. Similarly,
if low interest rates systematically create more opportunities to find mispriced corporate
bonds, our measure may misclassify better funds as more risk-taking. However, there is no
evidence of RFY indicating superior performance. On the contrary, Choi and Kronlund
(2018) find that the risk-adjusted performance of high-RFY investment grade corporate bond
mutual funds, measured as alpha, is negative. Despite this, investors continue to attempt RFY.
Having documented our main findings, we now turn to a discussion of these mechanisms.

One mechanism that can explain RFY among corporate bond mutual funds is that funds that
engage in it receive higher inflows, independent of returns (Choi and Kronlund 2018). This
indicates that investors have a higher demand for riskier assets when interest rates drop. When
investors RFY by investing in corporate bond mutual funds, they prefer to do so by increasing
their interest rate exposure, rather than taking on credit risk, resulting in greater inflows to
investment grade funds as interest rates fall (Huang et al., 2025). An experimental study has
found two behavioural explanations as to why retail investors’ appetite for risk increases as
interest rates fall. One of them is reference dependency: Investors may form a reference point
based on past returns, when interest rates drop below this level investors feel that returns are
too low and increase the riskiness of their holdings, to maintain returns at the level they are
used to. The second is salience: investors tend to compare returns by proportions rather than
differences. Thus, a 6% risky return relative to a 1% risk free return is deemed more attractive

                                     3
than a 10% risky return relative to a 5% risk free return, resulting in risky assets appearing
attractive during times of low interest rates (Lian et al. 2019).

Another channel of mechanisms is a principal-agent problem, in which mutual fund managers
increase the riskiness of their holdings during times of low interest rates, to forward their own
interests. Prior studies on money market funds have shown that managers increase the
riskiness of their holdings to maintain a positive net return when low interest rates pressure
the net return of a fund towards zero (Di Maggio and Kacperczyk, 2017; Chodorow-Reich
2014). Furthermore, when liquidity in the corporate bond market is high, the corporate bond
mutual funds that have performed the worst during the first three quarters tend to RFY more,
in an attempt to improve their end-year rating (Choi and Kronlund, 2018).

Next, we perform a subsample analysis to examine whether the lack of significant
                                                                    Active
relationships between the interest rate and RFY    , as well as the lack of significant
interaction terms between the expense ratio and interest rate, is because no such relationship
exists or if it only exists for certain funds or during certain time periods. We divide our full
sample into index and non-index funds. There are two reasons for this division. The first is
mechanical, index funds aim to track the performance of an index, by holding securities as
similar as possible to those held by the index. This leaves less room to RFY by adjusting the
riskiness of their holdings to the current interest rate level or changes in the interest rate. The
second reason is that investor expectations and fund incentives might differ between index
and non-index funds. Choi et al. (2026) finds that investors in passive bond funds appear
insensitive to the excess return of a fund compared to its benchmark, and that passive bond
funds are incentivized to keep costs low, as flows are sensitive to the expense ratio. Actively
rebalancing the portfolio to RFY, by increasing the riskiness as interest rates drop, would
incur substantial transaction costs. If passive fund flows do not respond to the additional
return, but negatively respond to the additional costs, they would have weak or non-existent
incentives to RFY.

Our regressions reveal that index funds exhibit the same negative relationship between the
                              Total
interest rate level and RFY    as the full sample. This could be interpreted as evidence that
the relationship is caused by a systematic negative relationship between our measure of
     Total
RFY   and the interest rate level, rather than active security selection performed by the
                          Active
manager, and that RFY    is the cleaner measure of active manager behaviour. However,
this conclusion assumes that index funds do not engage in security selection. Choi et al.
(2026) find that passive funds in the bond market to a large extent behave as active funds,
thus we must interpret these results with caution. When studying the effect of expense ratios
on RFY, we find a somewhat significant and negative interaction between the interest rate
                                    Total
level and expense ratio on RFY    in the non-index fund sample. The index fund subsample
has no such relationship. A potential explanation for the difference between the subsamples
could be that investors in non-index and index funds evaluate funds based on different
criteria, with index fund investors caring more about index tracking and low fees, rather than
net returns.

The next part of our subsample analysis focuses on retail and non-retail funds. If the
principal-agent problem is a driving mechanism for RFY, it would imply that when investors’
ability to monitor the behaviour and performance of the fund manager, RFY should decrease.
On average, institutional investors are likely to be more sophisticated than retail investors and
exhibit a greater ability to monitor a fund manager’s behaviour and performance. A study by
Evans and Fahlenbrach (2012) found that the presence of institutional investors reduced

                                     4
agency problems between fund managers and investors. Furthermore, retail and non-retail
funds might face different incentives. Investors in retail funds tend to invest
disproportionately more in the best performers, while institutional fund investors have a
significantly stronger tendency to divest from the worst performers (Elias et al., 2017). Thus,
retail fund managers have an incentive to take on excess risk to achieve higher returns and
attract greater flows. Non-retail fund managers on the other hand, have a weaker incentive to
take on excessive risk, as the upside is not as rewarding, but the consequences of being one of
the worst performers is worse. Consistent with this, Choi and Kronlund (2018) find that RFY
attracts higher inflows for retail funds in contrast to non-retail funds, creating a stronger
incentive for retail fund managers to take on excess risk.

Contrary to a principal-agent channel driving RFY, we find no substantial differences
between retail and non-retail funds, except for a negative relation between the expense ratio
          Total
and RFY    for retail funds. There are several potential explanations for the lack of
differences between retail and non-retail funds. It could be that both subsamples behave
similarly with regards to RFY. Another possibility is that the small sample of retail funds over
the time period of our study reduces the statistical power of our tests, obscuring any potential
differences.

In the final part of our subsample analysis, we focus on time periods. In absence of
institutional frictions and principal-agent problems, retail investors increase the riskiness of
their portfolio as interest rates fall (Gomes et al., 2025). This behaviour does not seem to be
unique for uneducated investors and does not appear to diminish with wealth or investment
experience. Lian et. al (2019) document significant RFY behaviour among financially
educated investors. These findings indicate that RFY, apart from a result of institutional
frictions, also is a behavioural response from investors to changing interest rates. As outlined
above, a potential mechanism behind this behavioural response is reference dependency,
which implies that RFY is not primarily caused by low interest rates in isolation, but rather by
interest rates falling below what investors are used to. The previously documented existence
of RFY in corporate bond mutual funds occurred between 2002 and 2012, a time period when
interest rates in general were lower than during the previous period (Choi and Kronlund,
2018). Our time period differs substantially in that it follows a decade of unprecedented low
interest rates, post the 2008 financial crisis. It is therefore possible that investors were content
with the returns at all interest rate levels above their reference point formed by the historically
low interest rates, resulting in a lower incentive for funds to RFY.

Furthermore, it is not necessarily the case that the relationship between corporate bond mutual
fund managers’ risk-taking, and interest rates is consistent across all levels of interest rates.
When interest rates are high, a drop does not necessarily put pressure on the fund manager to
RFY, if the return remains above previous returns and with a healthy margin to the expense
ratio. For instance, when the one-year Treasury yield fell from 5.06% to 4.64% during March
2023, the yield remained one of the highest recorded in the 21st century, significantly above
the one-year treasury yield of 1.63% recorded one year before. Without adjusting the riskiness
of their portfolio, fund managers could deliver higher yields than previous years and had a
significant margin to their expense ratio. Prior literature has not examined whether corporate
bond mutual funds exhibit different risk-taking behaviours across different interest rates
regimes. However, Di Maggio and Kacperczyk (2017) find that money market mutual funds
adjust the riskiness of their holdings in response to changes in the FED target rate when it is
below 1%, but find no significant effect when it is above 1%.

                                     5
Additionally, the relationship between risk-taking and changes in the interest rate might differ
depending on whether rates are falling or rising. When rates are decreasing, fund managers
have an incentive to RFY to deliver returns in line with historical returns and maintain the
margin between their yield and expense ratio. However, it is less clear that fund managers
have an incentive to decrease risk-taking and reduce yields in times of rising interest rates.

                                                                                                 Total
Unexpectedly, we find a positive relationship between the interest rate level and RFY    for
2019–2021, when interest rates were low and falling. We also find significant negative
interaction effects between the expense ratio and the level of or change in the interest rate, on
            Total            Active
both RFY    and RFY    . For the period 2018 and 2022–2024, results are consistent with
those for the full sample. This implies that when the margin between interest rates and
expense ratios is low and decreasing, expensive funds become more sensitive to interest rate
changes and are pressured to take on more risk to deliver a positive return net of fees.

This paper contributes to the growing literature on RFY in delegated investment management.
Becker and Ivashina (2015) show a propensity among insurance companies to invest in higher
yielding corporate bonds within a given rating, due to regulatory frictions. Similarly, Di
Maggio and Kacperczyk (2017) find that the prolonged period of a zero-rate policy pressured
money market funds to increase the riskiness of their holdings. Our paper explores RFY in a
less regulated environment, where institutional frictions are not a key driver. Specifically, we
study the existence and determinants of RFY among U.S. investment grade corporate bond
mutual funds. Our paper is closely related to Choi and Kronlund (2018), who study RFY
among U.S. corporate bond mutual funds. They find evidence of funds RFY and that this
attracts greater capital inflows, especially in times of low interest rates. The key innovation of
our paper is that we distinguish between active and total RFY, allowing us to examine
whether the relationship between interest rate and RFY is caused by active trading decisions
or market-wide movements. This decomposition of total RFY builds upon the method used by
Gomes et al. (2025), who find that Chinese retail investors invest more in risky assets as
interest rates drop.

We also contribute to the literature on the relationship between RFY and expense ratios, by
studying whether higher expense ratios pressures fund managers to RFY. Di Maggio and
Kacperczyk (2017) show that in times of low interest rates money market funds are more
likely to decrease their charged fees and increase the riskiness of their holdings, in an attempt
to maintain nonnegative net returns. Similarly, Chodorow-Reich (2014) finds that in 2009–
2011 the low interest rate resulted in high-cost money market funds accepting a greater risk in
pursuit of higher yields. We extend upon the existing literature by examining whether a
similar fee pressure exists for investment grade corporate bond mutual funds, who invest in
higher yielding securities than money market funds.

2. Data

To construct a portfolio level measure of RFY we combine data sets from multiple databases.
Portfolio holdings and characteristics, as well as bond maturities are obtained from CRSP,
while LSEG Workspace (formerly Eikon) is used to obtain other individual security data,
including bid yields, bid prices, issuer classification and asset classification. Macroeconomic
variables such as Treasury yields and measures of investment grade bond premiums are
retrieved from the Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED) database. Svensson yield

                                     6
parameters, which are used to construct benchmark yields, are sourced from the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System’s nominal yield curve data.

2.1 Mutual Funds & Holdings Data
We first retrieve quarterly updated portfolio holdings data between Q4 2017 and Q4 2024
from the CRSP Survivor-Bias-Free Mutual Fund database. The data is then limited to only
include portfolios classified as investment grade corporate bond funds, belonging to the
Lipper categories A or BBB. We only include quarterly reports to avoid more frequently
reporting portfolios biasing the sample. This data includes all securities held by the portfolio
at a specific point in time, the security identifier (Cusip8) and maturity.

Furthermore, we obtain portfolio level data – Total Net Assets (TNA), fund age, expense
ratio, percentage of cash and government issued securities of TNA, index and retail fund
classifications – from CRSP. The same portfolio can be held by multiple funds; thus, we
perform all analysis at the portfolio level to avoid portfolios with more share classes biasing
the sample. All variables that can vary between funds are calculated as the asset weighted
average of all funds associated with the portfolio.

2.2 Corporate Bond Data
The remaining security level data is obtained through LSEG Workspace. We first retrieve
issuer classification, fixed income asset classification and asset status. Since our analysis is
limited to risk-taking within the corporate bond holdings of portfolios, we remove all
securities that are not classified as issued by a corporation, and all securities not belonging to
fixed income classes flagged as straight bonds. Following the classification used by Choi and
Kronlund (2018), we treat certificates of deposits and commercial papers as cash rather than
corporate bonds, thus removing them. Furthermore, bond observations within 30 days of the
bond becoming expired, repaid early or defaulted are removed as bid yields in this period may
become distorted and not representative of the bonds underlying risk. Finally, we retrieve
coupon frequency and compounding convention for all bonds.

For all corporate bonds, we retrieve bid yields and bid prices from LSEG Pricing Service
(formerly known as Refinitiv Pricing Service and Thomson Reuters Pricing Service), in
accordance with Choi and Kronlund (2018). Other papers often rely on transaction-based
databases, such as Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE) (see e.g. Becker and
Ivashina, 2015). We do not use this approach as these databases are limited to a smaller subset
of corporate bonds due to focusing on reported transactions in a relatively illiquid market. The
potential downside is that bid prices can become stale and noninformative over time.
However, Choi and Richardson (2016) have shown that the two approaches report similar
prices, indicating that our chosen method will not distort our final results.

By nature, bid prices will be lower than transaction prices, resulting in bid yields exceeding
transaction yields. Since we compare corporate bond bid yields with modeled treasury yields,
there is a risk of a slight systematical overestimation of the difference in yields. However, as
this method is applied consistently across all bonds it should preserve the relative differences
and we believe the effect on our results to be marginal.

                                     7
3. Method & Variable Construction

In our empirical tests, we aim to identify the relationship between interest rates and corporate
bond mutual fund risk-taking. To do so, we construct a measure of total RFY and then
decompose it into active RFY. Our method to measure total RFY builds upon the method
introduced by Choi and Kronlund (2018), while the decomposition into active RFY builds
upon the method used by Gomes et al. (2025).

3.1 Total Reaching for Yield
Our measure of total RFY in a portfolio is the value weighted average of the RFY of the
individual corporate bonds held in the portfolio. For an individual bond, RFY is defined as the
spread between its bid yield and the yield of a maturity matched Treasury. For an individual
corporate bond i at time t, with maturity T and coupon frequency f, we define RFY as:

                                 𝑅𝐹𝑌𝑖,𝑡,𝑇,𝑓 = 𝐵𝑖𝑑 𝑦𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑦 𝑦𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑𝑡,𝑇,𝑓 (1)

where Bid yieldi,t is the last reported bid yield, and the Treasury yield is a maturity-matched
U.S. Treasury yield modeled based on Svensson parameters, the construction of which is
described in section 3.3. Both yields are measured at time t and expressed using a standard
bond market semi-annual compounding convention. Prior to this calculation bid yields are
winsorized at the 1% level, to reduce the sensitivity of the portfolio measure to extreme
outliers.

                                 Total
For a portfolio at time t, RFY    is calculated as:

                𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙                                                                                             (2)
         𝑅𝐹𝑌      = ∑ 𝑤𝑖,𝑡 · (𝐵𝑖𝑑 𝑦𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑦 𝑦𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑𝑡,𝑇,𝑓) = ∑ 𝑤𝑖,𝑡 · 𝑅𝐹𝑌𝑖,𝑡
                                                                          𝑖                                                                                                                                                                        𝑖

where wi,t is the percentage of Total Net Assets invested in corporate bonds allocated to bond
i at time t.

                              Total
Given this definition, RFY    reflects only the riskiness of a portfolio's corporate bond
holdings, rather than total portfolio riskiness. Although all portfolios are classified as
investment grade corporate bond funds, they could differ in their allocations to non-corporate
bond assets. For example, a portfolio may hold relatively risky corporate bonds, but offset
some of this risk by maintaining a relatively larger buffer of cash and Treasuries. In such
cases, our measure of total RFY will overstate the riskiness of the portfolio. However, prior
literature has not identified any such offsetting behaviour. In fact, Choi and Kronlund (2018)
find a significant negative relationship between the share invested in cash and Treasuries and
RFY, as well as a significant positive relationship between the share invested in equities and
RFY. This indicates that RFY is an economically meaningful measure of portfolio risk-taking,
as it is positively associated with investments in riskier asset classes and not systematically
offset by larger allocations to safe asset classes.

There is no single standard method to measure RFY. Our definition of total RFY builds on the
method introduced by Choi and Kronlund (2018), but it differs in the choice of the benchmark
yield which bond bid yields are compared to. We compare bid yields to a maturity-matched
Treasury yield, while Choi and Kronlund (2018) construct a benchmark yield based on all
bonds in the FISD database that satisfy the requirements for inclusion in a Barclays bond
index (investment grade or high yield, based on the individual bond grade). In an additional

                                     8
decomposition they also control for rating and maturity by comparing the bond bid yield to
that of bonds with a similar rating and maturity.

Using a maturity-matched Treasury yield as the benchmark yield allows us to control for the
maturity component of risk. While this approach does not explicitly control for rating, our
sample only consisting of investment grade corporate bond mutual funds limits differences in
ratings compared to the broader sample used by Choi and Kronlund (2018), who study all
bond funds that hold at least one corporate bond, including high yield funds.

More broadly, our definition of RFY captures excess yield against a risk-free investment with
the same maturity, whereas Choi and Kronlund’s (2018) definition captures excess yield
against a bond index of the same rating and maturity. However, since we are primarily
interested in changes over time and within funds, we expect both measures to exhibit similar
patterns. Furthermore, not controlling for rating allows us to construct a measure which
examines the total riskiness of a portfolio’s bond holdings, also capturing a movement from
higher grade bonds to lower grade bonds in an attempt to reach for yield.

3.2 Active Reaching for Yield
A further detail that must be taken into consideration is the active rebalancing in portfolio
holdings between quarters. As bond prices and yields move in opposite directions, an increase
in total RFY can be caused by an active decision to increase the riskiness of the portfolio, or
falling bond prices. To isolate the effect of a portfolio manager’s active trading decisions, we
decompose total RFY and calculate active RFY. Following the method used by Gomes et al.
(2025), we compute a counterfactual measure of total RFY, under the assumption that no
trades occurred between the previous quarter t-1 and current quarter t. For a portfolio held at
time t, the counterfactual RFY is defined as:

                𝐶𝐹               𝐶𝐹                                                                  𝐶𝐹
        𝑅𝐹𝑌   𝑡 = ∑ 𝑤𝑖,𝑡 · (𝐵𝑖𝑑 𝑦𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑦 𝑦𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑𝑡,𝑇) = ∑ 𝑤𝑖,𝑡 · 𝑅𝐹𝑌𝑖,𝑡
                                                                    𝑖                                                                                                                                                                   𝑖
           𝐶𝐹
where 𝑤𝑖,𝑡  denotes the counterfactual portfolio weight of bond i at time t, defined as the
weight the bond would have had, had the portfolio not made any changes to its holdings since
the previous quarter t-1.

                                             𝐶𝐹       𝑄𝑖,𝑡−1 · 𝐵𝑖𝑑 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑡
                                       𝑤𝑖,𝑡  =
                                                   ∑ 𝑖 𝑄𝑖,𝑡−1 · 𝐵𝑖𝑑 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑡

where Qi,t-1 denotes the quantity, measured as the total face value, of the bond i held at time t-
1, and 𝑏𝑖𝑑 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑡 denotes the bond’s price, expressed as a percentage of face value, at time t.

To ensure consistency, we apply the same data cleaning procedure as described in section 3.1,
winsorizing bid yields at the 1% level. Any observations within 30 days of a bond becoming
expired, repaid early or defaulted are disregarded, as their yields risk becoming disconnected
from the underlying risk.

Finally, we can compute the active change in RFY as:

                                           𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒           𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙           𝐶𝐹 (3)
                         𝑅𝐹𝑌      = 𝑅𝐹𝑌     − 𝑅𝐹𝑌

                                     9
This definition allows us to isolate the component of RFY that is intentional and due to active
trading since the last quarter, from changes in RFY due to price movements of bonds already
held by the portfolio.

3.3 Benchmark Yield
When calculating RFY for an individual bond we isolate the yield component attributable to
risk-taking, by constructing a benchmark yield with as similar characteristics as possible to
each corporate bond, but free of credit risk. We specifically use the Svensson (1994) nominal
yield curve model, based on daily parameter estimates published by the Federal Reserve
(Gürkaynak et al., 2007).

The main advantage of using the Svensson nominal yield curve model is that for a corporate
bond i at time t, with maturity T and coupon frequency f, we can construct the yield of a U.S.
Treasury with matching maturity and coupon frequency. Relying on yields from traded U.S.
Treasuries would restrict us to available maturities, which would introduce interpolation
errors. This is a large concern for maturities exceeding 30 years, as the U.S. Treasury does not
issue securities with maturities beyond this horizon. Since corporate bonds occasionally trade
at these maturities, relying on observed Treasury yields is not ideal. Conversely, the Svensson
model can be applied to any maturity, including those exceeding 30 years.

In the Svensson (1994) model the continuously compounded yield of a zero-coupon U.S.
Treasury with maturity T is given by:

                                                         𝑇                                     𝑇                                                                  𝑇
                    1 − 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−  )         1 − 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−  )            𝑇          1 − 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−  )            𝑇
                                             𝜏1                            𝜏1                                                   𝜏2
𝑦𝑡(𝑇) = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1     𝑇      + 𝛽2 [     𝑇      − 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−  )] + 𝛽3 [     𝑇      − 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−  )] (4)
                                                                                             𝜏1                                                𝜏2
                                      𝜏1                            𝜏1                                                   𝜏2

where 𝛽0, 𝛽1, 𝛽2, 𝛽3, 𝜏1, and 𝜏2 are the Svensson model parameters, as estimated by the
Federal Reserve. From this, one can then derive the discount factor for maturity T:

                                                                       −𝑦(𝑇)·𝑇
                                      𝑑(𝑇) = 𝑒

For all zero-coupon and stripped corporate bonds, the zero-coupon yield from equation (4),
converted to a semi-annual compounding convention, is the benchmark yield used in equation
(1).

For coupon bearing bonds a par yield must be constructed. Due to data availability, the par
yield cannot be constructed using the exact cash flow timeline. Instead, we assume that for a
corporate bond i at time t, with coupon frequency f (defined as coupons per year) a coupon is
paid at maturity and then at equal intervals of 1/f years, working backwards towards time t.
The first period is a stub period and can be shorter than 1/f, if T is not a perfect multiple of 1/f.
In such cases, the first coupon payment is scaled proportionally to the length of the stub
period. Formally, the coupon payments occur at times times t1, t2, t3... tn where tn = T.

The par yield is defined as the coupon rate at which a hypothetical Treasury would trade at
par (Gürkaynak et al., 2007). For a given bond i with maturity T and coupon frequency f, it is
given by:

                                     10
                                             𝑓 · [1 − 𝑑𝑧𝑒𝑟𝑜 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑜𝑛(𝑇)]
                         𝑦𝑝𝑎𝑟 𝑦𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑(𝑓, 𝑇) =                                                      (5)
                                                    ∑𝑖  𝑑𝑧𝑒𝑟𝑜 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑜𝑛 (𝑡𝑖) · 𝛥𝑡𝑖 · 𝑓

where Δ ti = ti – ti-1 is the length of the i:th coupon period, which is 1/f for all periods except
the stub period. 𝑑𝑧𝑒𝑟𝑜 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑜𝑛(𝑡𝑖) is the discount factor for maturity ti.

For all coupon bearing bonds, the par yield from equation (5), converted to a semi-annual
compounding convention, is the benchmark yield used in equation (1).

3.4 Interest Rate Variables Construction
Interest rates are the primary explanatory variables in our analysis of RFY. Given that our
sample consists of U.S. corporate bond mutual funds, we use U.S. Treasury yields as our
proxy for the interest rate level, consistent with common practice in literature. In line with
Choi and Kronlund (2018), we use the one-year Treasury market yield, retrieved from the
FRED.

When studying active RFY, the interest rate level is not expected to be the primary
explanatory variable. If rates remain persistently low for an extended period of time, as they
did following the 2008 financial crisis, corporate bond mutual funds are not expected to
continuously increase the riskiness of their holdings in every period. Active RFY is primarily
expected to respond to changes in the interest rate, as funds adjust the riskiness of their
portfolios in response to the new rate environment. Thus, we regress active RFY at time t on
the change in the interest rate level, following the method used by Gomes et al. (2025).

We define the interest rate change as the difference in the interest rate level between the
current quarter t and the previous quarter t-1. However, as both the trading that results in
active RFY and the change in interest rate level occur within the same period, identifying
causality may be difficult. A fund taking on more risk before interest rates are lowered can be
misinterpreted as the fund reallocating its portfolio in response to the interest rate change. To
mitigate this concern, we regress active RFY at time t on the change in the interest rate level
between the quarters t-1 and t-2. This lagged definition provides a cleaner interpretation of
how funds respond to changes in interest rates. Furthermore, given the illiquid nature of
corporate bonds, there is likely to be a lag between changes in the interest rate and portfolio
adjustments, better captured by the lagged definition.

3.5 Other Explanatory Variables
As time fixed effects would absorb the interest rate variation of interest, we instead control for
differences in the macroeconomic environment through other variables. Similarly, when
examining the effect of expense ratios on RFY we control for fund differences through
various fund-level control variables. The selection of both macroeconomic and fund level
variables largely follows Choi and Kronlund (2018).

We control for the market's sentiment regarding future economic outcomes, proxied by the
slope of the yield curve. Following the method used by Choi and Kronlund (2018) we define
the yield slope as the difference in market yields between thirty-year and one-year U.S.
Treasuries. We also control for bond market illiquidity, proxied by the Volatility Index (VIX),
from the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE). This is an established proxy for bond
market illiquidity and has a strong positive correlation with other illiquidity measures such as
the Dick-Nielsen, Feldhutter, and Lando Index (DFL Index) used by Choi and Kronlund
(2018) (Goldstein et al., 2017). Some regressions include bond premium, defined as the extra

                                     11
yield required by investors to hold investment grade corporate debt. This is proxied by the
ICE BofA U.S. Corporate Index Option-Adjusted Spread data, which measures the spread
between an index of investment grade rated corporate debt publicly issued in the U.S.
domestic market, and a Treasury yield curve. All macroeconomic data are obtained from
FRED.

The main fund-level variable of interest is the expense ratio. Since it can vary between share
classes associated with a portfolio, it is calculated as the Total Net Asset weighted average of
the expense ratios of all funds associated with the portfolio. Waivers and reimbursements are
included in the expense ratio. To avoid any lookahead bias, we use the expense ratio as of the
most recently completed fiscal year end.

We also include other fund-level characteristics that could be associated with a fund's degree
of risk-taking. Younger funds could be incentivized to RFY, as they have less built-up
reputational capital to lose in case the strategy backfires and leads to poor performance (Choi
and Kronlund, 2018). Therefore, we control for Fund Age, measured as the log age of the
earliest fund offering associated with the portfolio. We also control for Fund Size, measured
as the log of Total Net Assets (expressed in million USD), and Fund Style, proxied by the
Lipper code. Finally, we include the Safe Asset Share, which is the percentage of Total Net
Assets invested in government securities and cash. This reflects the idea that holding a
liquidity buffer of safe assets may influence a fund’s risk-taking behaviour. All fund-level
variables are obtained from CRSP.

4. Testable Predictions

In this section we present the testable predictions that will guide our empirical analysis. The
most fundamental prediction is that interest rates are inversely related to the riskiness of
corporate bond mutual funds’ holdings. We therefore expect a significant negative
                                                                         Total
relationship between the interest rate level and RFY   . However, we do not expect interest
                                   Active
rate level to predict RFY    , since that would imply that funds continuously increase the
riskiness of their holdings during prolonged periods of low interest rates. Instead, we expect
funds to adjust the riskiness of their holdings in response to changes in the interest rate. If
decreasing interest rates induce fund managers to actively RFY, we should see a negative
                                                            Active          Total
relation between change in interest rate and RFY    . If RFY    does not reflect active
                                                                                                                                Total
trading decisions, but rather market-wide spread movements or benchmark exposure, RFY
                                                     Active
may move with interest rates, even when RFY    does not.

When it comes to expense ratios, the most fundamental prediction is that more expensive
funds will engage more in RFY, such that there is a negative relation between expense ratio
            Total                                                                                        Active
and RFY   . However, we do not expect this relationship to exist for RFY    , since it is a
measure of how risk-taking changes within a fund. If expense ratios moderate the relationship
between interest rates and risk-taking, such that more expensive funds have a stronger
pressure to RFY when interest rates are low, there should be a significant negative interaction
                                                                                         Total
effect between expense ratio and the interest rate level on RFY   . Similarly, the interaction
                                                                                                                            Active
between expense ratio and change in interest rate should be negatively related to RFY    , if
the most expensive funds face a stronger pressure to RFY when interest rates are falling.

When splitting our sample into subsamples, we predict non-index funds to act in accordance
with the predictions for the full sample. We expect the results to be weaker for index funds, as

                                     12
they might face lower incentives to RFY, if they are evaluated based on costs and index
tracking performance rather than returns. Similarly, if RFY is partially explained as a
principal-agent problem, we expect retail funds to conduct more RFY than non-retail funds
whose investors have a stronger monitoring ability. Finally, when splitting our sample based
on time, we expect to find stronger evidence of the expense ratio-pressure channel resulting in
RFY during 2019–2021, when interest rates were low and falling towards the level of
corporate bond mutual funds’ expense ratios. If reference dependency is a mechanism that
drives RFY, we also expect stronger evidence of RFY in the 2019–2021 subsample.

5. Results & Discussion

5.1 Summary Statistics
In Table 1 we present summary statistics for our final merged sample, which post cleaning
consist of 201 unique funds over 28 quarters, and a total of 3867 unique fund-quarter
                                                                                Total           Active
observations. The difference in number of observations between RFY    and RFY    is due
                                                                CF
to data availability, as we are unable to construct a measure of RFY   for the following
quarter t+1 when CRSP does not cover a fund’s holding for quarter t, resulting in two lost
                       Active                                                                Total
observations of RFY    (t and t+1). Although we are not able to construct RFY    for
quarter t, the variable is observable for the following quarter t+1, explaining the slight
difference in sample size.

In terms of holdings, our funds mainly invest in corporate bonds, making up 75.5% of their
assets on average (median 89.0%), showcasing the novelty of our sample compared to prior
literature, as it is more narrowly focused on corporate bond mutual funds. Specifically, the
average weight in corporate bonds in our sample is approximately 30 percentage points (p.p.)
higher than the one used by Choi and Kronlund (2018), and roughly 40 p.p. higher than in
their investment grade subsample. This allows us to more closely approximate the total risk-
taking in a fund by studying only the corporate bond holdings, since they allocate less of their
portfolio to other asset classes, limiting their ability to either offset or increase the risk
elsewhere in the portfolio. Despite limiting the sample to investment grade corporate bond
mutual funds, there are still some funds that only allocate 10% of their assets to corporate
bonds. This is a result of corporate bond funds having lenient investment mandates. However,
more than 75% of our observations are of portfolios with a majority of their assets invested in
corporate bonds, which along with the high mean and median limits the impact of portfolios
with a low corporate bond allocation on our final results. The lenient investment mandate is
also seen in the variation in allocations to other asset classes.

                                             Total
There is a noteworthy variation in RFY    across our sample, with an interquartile range of
1.06 to 1.69. On average, funds in our sample hold corporate bonds with an excess return of
                                                                                  Active
1.45 p.p. compared to a risk-free investment. As for RFY    , we see not only a high
variation, but also more than a quarter of our funds reporting negative numbers, meaning that
they actively shift their portfolios to reduce risk-taking. Consistent with the nature of
investment grade corporate bond mutual funds, the average expense ratio is low. However,
there is a substantial variation between funds, with an interquartile range of 0.10 to 0.60.

In terms of macroeconomic variables, Table 1 showcases high variations, highlighting the
tumultuous nature of our time period. The 1Y Treasury yield drops to almost 0% during the
COVID-19 pandemic, to then recover to more than 5.4% towards the end of 2023.

                                     13
Table 1
Summary statistics

                          Mean Sd p1 p25 p50 p75 p99 N
 A. Fund characteristics
 Total RFY 1.45 0.61 0.49 1.06 1.33 1.69 3.62 3,867
 Active RFY 0.01 0.10 −0.24 −0.01 0.01 0.03 0.25 3,703
 TNA ($M) 1,875 5,162 6 78 381 1,404 31,889 3,865
 Age (years) 17.2 15.0 0.3 5.3 12.9 27.0 59.0 3,867
 Expense ratio (%) 0.39 0.29 0.00 0.10 0.37 0.60 1.22 3,013
 Cash (%) 0.3 12.7 −42.1 0.0 0.7 1.8 18.0 3,867
 Government (%) 11.0 17.5 0.0 0.3 3.5 15.0 62.5 3,867
 Municipal (%) 1.1 4.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.9 10.6 3,867
 Corporate bonds (%) 75.5 26.5 10.0 52.4 89.0 96.9 99.8 3,867
 Asset-backed (%) 3.2 6.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.0 27.0 3,867
 Mortgage-backed (%) 5.4 11.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.8 40.4 3,867
 Common stocks (%) 0.2 1.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.1 3,867
 Preferred stocks (%) 0.5 2.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 10.2 3,867
 Other equity (%) 0.1 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.2 3,867
 Other (%) 0.7 10.5 −20.2 0.0 0.1 1.0 29.0 3,867

 B. Macroeconomic variables
 1Y Treasury yield (%) 2.51 1.92 0.07 0.34 2.37 4.28 5.44 28
 Change in 1Y yield 0.09 0.60 −1.34 −0.11 0.03 0.27 1.25 28
 Yield slope 0.48 0.99 −1.39 −0.34 0.60 1.20 2.25 28
 Bond premium 1.26 0.430 0.83 0.98 1.22 1.40 2.68 28
 Market illiquidity 20.19 8.57 12.21 14.76 17.44 22.85 47.62 28

The sample consists of all investment grade corporate bond mutual funds in the CRSP Mutual Funds database.
Investment grade is defined as belonging to the Lipper style codes A or BBB. The sample period is from Q1
2018 to Q4 2024. Observations are at the fund-quarter level and there are 201 unique funds over 28 periods.
Panel A reports fund level characteristics. The measures of Total RFY and Active RFY are defined in equations
(2) and (3) respectively. TNA, age and expense ratio are calculated based on data from CRSP. Expense ratio is
the value weighted average of the expense ratio of all funds associated with a portfolio, as of the most recently
completed fiscal year. Cash, government, municipal, corporate bonds, asset-backed, mortgage-backed, common
stocks, preferred stocks, other equity and other are all defined as the percentage of a portfolio invested in that
security class. All holdings data is sourced from CRSP. Panel B reports macroeconomic variables. Change in 1Y
yield is defined as the change in the 1Y Treasury yield over a quarter. Yield slope is computed as the difference in
yield between the thirty-year and one-year Treasury. Bond premium is estimated by the ICE BofA U.S.
Corporate Index Option-Adjusted Spread, market illiquidity by Volatility Index (VIX) from the Chicago Board
Options Exchange (CBOE). All macroeconomic data is sourced from FRED.

Consequently, the change in interest rate spans from -1.34 p.p. to 1.25 p.p. The wide
fluctuations in interest rate are expected to result in a time period with drastically changing
pressure to RFY. The low interest rates in 2020 are likely to compress returns and provide a
strong incentive to RFY, whereas the high interest rates in 2023 are likely to remove most
incentives to RFY.

5.2 Reaching for Yield and the Macroeconomic Environment
To investigate the existence and extent of RFY in corporate bond mutual funds during the
period March 2018 to December 2024, we first examine the relationship between
                                                         Total           Active
macroeconomic factors and our measures of RFY    and RFY    in our full sample.

                                     14
 Table 2
 Regression of RFY on macroeconomic variables

                                RFY (Total) RFY (Active)
 Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4)
 Interest rate level −0.132*** 0.001
                                     (0.030) (0.003)
 Yield slope −0.413*** 0.004 0.003 0.004*
                                    (0.057) (0.006) (0.002) (0.002)
 Market illiquidity 0.046*** −0.001*** −0.001*** −0.001***
                                    (0.005) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
 Interest rate change 0.008**
                                                                              (0.004)
 Lagged interest rate change 0.006*
                                                                                               (0.003)
 Fund FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes
 R² 0.844 0.200 0.203 0.201
 N 3,863 3,701 3,701 3,701

This table presents regression estimates of RFY on macroeconomic variables. Observations are at the fund-
quarter level. Dependent variables are total RFY and active RFY, as defined in equations (2) and (3)
respectively. Independent variables are interest rate level (the one-year Treasury yield), yield slope (difference
between the thirty-year and one-year Treasury yield), market illiquidity proxied by the volatility Index (VIX)
from the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), interest rate change (difference in the one-year Treasury
yield between a quarter t and its predecessor t-1) and lagged interest rate change (difference in the one-year
Treasury yield between the previous quarter t-1 and its predecessor t-2). All regressions include fund fixed
effects, to control for a changing fund population over time. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the fund
and quarter levels and presented in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%
and 1% level, respectively.

If funds are RFY, we expect a significant negative relationship between the interest rate level
            Total                                                                       Active
and RFY   , as well as between interest rate change and RFY    . In Table 2, we regress
     Total
RFY    on interest rate level, the yield slope of the term structure and market illiquidity. The
choice of independent variables largely follows Choi and Kronlund (2018), except for our
                                                                                 Active
exclusion of credit spread as a control variable. For RFY    , we also examine the interest
rate variables interest rate change and lagged interest rate change in separate regressions.

In line with our expectations, Column 1 of Table 2 shows that when interest rates are lower,
corporate bond mutual funds reach more for yield. A 1 p.p. decrease in interest rates leads to
                               Total
funds increasing their RFY    by 0.132 p.p. This relationship is strongly significant, as is the
                                                                             Total
negative relationship between the yield slope and RFY   . These findings are consistent with
corporate bond mutual funds RFY and imply that when bond yields are compressed due to
low interest rates, funds take on more risk in an attempt to increase their yield. Similarly, our
results imply that when expectations of future returns are low, as proxied by the yield slope,
funds take on more risk to maintain a higher yield. Both of these relationships are similar to
those found by Choi and Kronlund (2018).

We also find a strongly significant, positive relationship between market illiquidity and
      Total
RFY   . This is unexpected and goes against previous literature, which finds a significant
negative relationship between RFY in investment grade funds and market illiquidity, when
controlling for maturity and rating (Choi and Kronlund, 2018). However, when we examine
     Active
RFY    in columns 2-4, we find a strongly significant, negative relationship with market

                                     15
illiquidity, implying that when markets are illiquid, fund managers actively trade to reduce the
riskiness of their holdings, although the economic magnitude of the effect is relatively small.
                                                                                         Active
Column 4 also shows a positive relationship between the yield slope and RFY    significant
at the 10% level.

As shown in column 2, we find no significant relationship between the interest rate level and
      Active
RFY    . In column 3 and 4 we find a positive relationship between both interest rate change
                                                Active
and lagged interest rate change with RFY    that are significant at the 5% and 10% levels
respectively. This implies that when interest rates are falling, funds respond by decreasing the
riskiness of their holdings. The economic magnitude of this effect is small, as a 1 p.p. drop in
the interest rate only corresponds to a 0.006 p.p. decrease in active RFY. If fund managers
were RFY by increasing the riskiness of their corporate bond holdings as interest rates fall, we
would expect a significant negative relationship between changes in interest rates and
      Active
RFY   . The absence of such a relationship implies that the evidence of RFY found in
column 1 is not driven by active trading decisions. This raises the question of what alternative
                                                                         Total
mechanisms can explain the observed relationship between RFY    and interest rate level.
One possible explanation is that fund managers design their portfolios to automatically
                                                                 Total
respond to changes in the interest rate, ensuring that RFY    increases when interest rates fall.
Another possible explanation is that investment grade bonds have a structural connection to
the interest rate level, such that when the latter is low, the spread between investment grade
bond yields and Treasury yields increases. This is more likely to occur in times of crisis when
interest rates drop and the credit spread widens. In our sample period we observe this pattern
following COVID-19, when the bond premium drastically rose simultaneously as the interest
rate level fell towards zero.

In Appendix A, Table 7, we control for bond premium, to explore whether the identified
                              Total
relationship between RFY    and interest rate level is driven by changes in the spread
between investment grade bond and Treasuries, rather than the interest rate level itself.
Column 1 shows a strongly significant positive relationship between bond premium and
      Total
RFY   . When controlling for bond premium, the relationship between the interest rate level
          Total
and RFY    disappears. However, these results must be interpreted with caution, as there is a
risk of bond premium being a bad control. There is a strong conceptual and mechanical
                                          Total
overlap between our measure of RFY    (the weighted average of the spread between bid
yields and Treasury yields of all bonds in a portfolio) and bond premium (the spread between
all investment grade bonds and Treasuries), making the disappearance of the significant effect
of the interest rate level less informative. Due to this, the regressions without bond premium
are more likely to represent reality and are our primary evidence. This is also the reason why
we do not use credit spread as a control variable, unlike Choi and Kronlund (2018).

5.3 Reaching for Yield and Expense Ratios
Given that there seems to be a relationship between the interest rate level and RFY, we
investigate what mechanisms can explain this relationship. In this section we examine
whether the pressure of low interest rates on fees incentivize funds with higher expense ratios
to conduct more RFY. Due to the significant variation in expense ratios across the funds in
our sample, as presented in Table 1, we expect to identify significantly different responses to
the interest rate level and interest rate change, if such a relationship exists.

                                     16
Table 3
Regression of RFY on expense ratio

A. No interaction
                                RFY (Total) RFY (Active)
 Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4)
 Interest rate level −0.118*** 0.003
                                     (0.027) (0.004)
 Yield slope −0.394*** 0.008 0.003 0.004*
                                     (0.049) (0.006) (0.002) (0.002)
 Market illiquidity 0.046*** −0.001*** −0.001*** −0.001***
                                   (0.004) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
 Interest rate change 0.010***
                                                                             (0.004)
 Lagged interest rate change 0.008**
                                                                                              (0.003)
 Expense ratio 0.526*** −0.006 −0.007 −0.007
                                   (0.187) (0.016) (0.016) (0.016)
 Log age 0.076 0.006 0.007 0.007
                                    (0.045) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005)
 % safe assets −0.000 −0.000 −0.000 −0.000
                                   (0.001) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
 Log TNA 0.001 −0.003 −0.003 −0.003
                                   (0.016) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003)
 BBB objective 0.166 0.021 0.021 0.021
                                   (0.101) (0.017) (0.017) (0.017)
 R² 0.545 0.020 0.023 0.021
 N 3,013 2,931 2,931 2,931
Continued.

In Table 3, panel A, we first examine whether a direct relationship exists between expense
                 Total          Active
ratio and RFY   or RFY    . The macroeconomic variables included are identical to those in
Table 2. However, as we can no longer control for fund differences through fund fixed
effects, we add a series of fund control variables that may be related to the level of risk-
taking. These are log (Fund Age), log (Fund Size), percentage safe assets and a dummy
variable for fund style. These regressions are run on a slightly smaller sample, due to some of
the fund-quarter observations included in Table 2 not having any matching expense ratio
data.

                         Total
When regressing RFY    on expense ratio, we observe a positive and significant relationship,
as presented in column 1 of Table 3, panel A. This is consistent with our expectations, but
cannot in itself be interpreted as clear evidence that higher-costs funds RFY because of fee
pressure. A more prudent interpretation of the result in column 1 is that funds with higher
expense ratios generally hold higher-yielding bonds. One possible explanation as to why more
expensive funds hold higher yielding bonds is that they follow a more active strategy, trying
to identify underpriced securities. Due to the negative relationship between bond prices and
bond yields, a fund that attempts to invest in underpriced assets will hold higher yielding
bonds and appear to be RFY. In return for attempting to find mispriced assets, the fund
charges a higher fee. Another possible explanation is that it is more costly to engage in trades
of higher yielding bonds.

                                     17
Table 3
Regression of RFY on expense ratio

B. With interaction
                                RFY (Total) RFY (Active)
 Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4)
 Interest rate level −0.102*** 0.005
                                    (0.029) (0.004)
 Int. rate level × Exp. ratio −0.043 −0.004
                                    (0.028) (0.005)
 Yield slope −0.395*** 0.008 0.003 0.004*
                                     (0.049) (0.006) (0.002) (0.002)
 Market illiquidity 0.046*** −0.001*** −0.001*** −0.001***
                                   (0.004) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
 Interest rate change 0.008
                                                                             (0.005)
 Int. rate change × Exp. ratio 0.005
                                                                             (0.013)
 Lagged interest rate change 0.015*
                                                                                              (0.007)
 Lagged int. rate chg. × Exp. ratio −0.019
                                                                                              (0.019)
 Expense ratio 0.631*** 0.003 −0.007 −0.005
                                   (0.181) (0.023) (0.017) (0.017)
 Log age 0.076 0.006 0.007 0.006
                                   (0.045) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005)
 % safe assets −0.000 −0.000 −0.000 −0.000
                                   (0.001) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
 Log TNA 0.000 −0.003 −0.003 −0.003
                                   (0.016) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003)
 BBB objective 0.166 0.021 0.021 0.021
                                   (0.101) (0.017) (0.017) (0.017)
 R² 0.546 0.020 0.023 0.023
 N 3,013 2,931 2,931 2,931

This table presents regressions of RFY on expense ratio (calculated as the value weighted average across all
share classes). Observations are at the fund-quarter level. Dependent variables are total RFY and active RFY, as
defined in equations (2) and (3) respectively. Independent macroeconomic variables are interest rate level (the
one-year Treasury yield), yield slope (difference between the thirty-year and one-year Treasury yield), market
illiquidity proxied by the volatility Index (VIX) from the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), interest
rate change (difference in the one-year Treasury yield between a quarter t and its predecessor t-1) and lagged
interest rate change (difference in the one-year Treasury yield between the previous quarter t-1 and its
predecessor t-2). Fund level control variables include age (log), percentage invested in safe assets (defined as
cash and government securities), TNA (log) and a Lipper objective code dummy. In panel B we further interact
the expense ratio with the interest rate variable used in each regression. Standard errors are two-way clustered at
the fund and quarter levels and presented in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

They might have a higher illiquidity and require a greater degree of effort from the fund
manager to ensure that the underlying corporation will not default. Funds trading higher
yielding bonds therefore charge a higher fee to cover these costs.

                                     18
                       Active
When studying RFY    we find no significant relationship with expense ratios, as shown in
                                                Active
column 2 to 4. This is expected since RFY    is a measure relative to a portfolio's previous
holdings, and funds with higher expense ratios are not expected to consistently increase the
riskiness of their holdings over time.

To examine whether expense ratio moderates the relationship between interest rates and RFY,
such that higher expense ratios result in a stronger incentive to RFY, we add an interaction
effect between the interest rate variable and expense ratio to each of the regression in Table 3,
panel A. The results are presented in panel B of Table 3. As none of the interaction effects are
significant, we find no evidence that a higher expense ratio pressures funds to RFY more.
                                                                                                                           Total
This indicates that the strongly significant relationship between expense ratio and RFY
identified in panel A, column 1 is due to high-cost funds following riskier or more active
investment strategies at all times, rather than expense ratios impacting how funds respond to
the level of interest rates or changes in it.

However, the absence of significant results does not necessarily imply that no relationship
exists. It is possible that the relationship is present only for specific types of funds or during
particular time periods. If that is the case, our broad sample is likely to obscure the results. To
address this possibility, we conduct a subsample analysis in the following section.

5.4 Subsample Analysis
Our subsample analysis to examine whether our full sample obscures results is divided into
three different sections. Our first two sections are focused on portfolio holdings, first we
divide our sample into index and non-index funds and in the second division we divide it into
retail and non-retail funds. The third and final division is based on the time period. We look at
the years 2019–2021 and 2018 & 2022–2024.

5.4.1 Index & Non-Index Funds
We first divide our full sample into index and non-index funds. In Table 4, panel A, we
perform the same regressions as those presented in Table 2, for both subsamples. As shown in
                                                     Total
column 1 and 5 the relationships between RFY    with yield slope and market illiquidity are
similar across both subsamples and the full sample. Furthermore, the interest rate level and its
                               Total
relationship with RFY   , also shown in column 1 and 5 is almost identical across both
subsamples and the full sample, indicating no evidence of differences in this relationship for
index and non-index funds. This suggests that the relationship found in the full sample
captures some market-wide movement or benchmark component outside of the fund
managers control, rather than active rebalancing or portfolio design decisions by managers.

This conclusion relies on the assumption that index funds track an index rather than engaging
in security selection. However, Choi et al. (2026) find that the characteristics of the bond
market, specifically the illiquidity and index-tracking frictions, result in passive bond funds
behaving similar to active funds and actively engaging in security selection. In their study,
they document a median active share of passive bond funds of 59%, as compared to the
median active share of passive equity funds of 2%, found by Crane and Crotty (2018). This
suggests that the identified relationship for index funds between interest rate level and
     Total
RFY   should not necessarily be interpreted as evidence in favour of the relationship for all
funds being driven by market-wide effects rather than active portfolio choices. It could also
imply that index fund managers make similar active choices as their non-index counterparts.

                                     19
Table 4
Regression of RFY — Index & non-index funds

Panel A: Macroeconomic variables
                                               Index funds Non-index funds
                         RFY              RFY               RFY              RFY
                                      (Total)                   (Active)                     (Total)                   (Active)
Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Interest rate level −0.136*** −0.001 −0.130*** 0.003
                               (0.031) (0.006) (0.031) (0.003)
Yield slope −0.374*** −0.003 −0.000 0.002 −0.434*** 0.009 0.005* 0.005*
                              (0.054) (0.010) (0.002) (0.002) (0.062) (0.006) (0.003) (0.003)
Market illiquidity 0.038*** −0.001** −0.001*** −0.001*** 0.050*** −0.001*** −0.001*** −0.001***
                              (0.006) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.004) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
Interest rate change 0.006 0.009*
                                                      (0.004) (0.005)
Lagged interest rate change 0.013** 0.002
                                                                 (0.005) (0.005)
Fund FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
R² 0.827 0.182 0.184 0.190 0.835 0.208 0.210 0.207
N 1,305 1,253 1,253 1,253 2,558 2,448 2,448 2,448
Continued.

                                                                   Active
While the relationship between market illiquidity and RFY    is consistent across both
subsamples and the full sample, there is a positive relationship between yield slope and
      Active
RFY    , significant at the 10% level, for non-index funds, as shown in column 7 and 8. This
                                                                   Total
implies that contradictory to the relationship between RFY    and the yield slope, found by
both us and Choi and Kronlund (2018), non-index funds might trade to increase the riskiness
of their holdings when the economic outlook is good. A potential explanation is that the
positive beliefs result in fund managers feeling more comfortable with taking on additional
                                                                                                   Active
risk. However, as seen in column 6, the significance disappears when we regress RFY    on
the interest rate level.

Furthermore, while both subsamples exhibit a weakly significant relationship between
                                                Active
changes in interest rates and RFY    , there is a difference in timing. Index funds increase
           Active
their RFY    in the same quarter as the change occurs, while the increase is lagged by one
quarter for non-index funds. This suggests that index funds adjust their portfolios quicker than
non-index funds, which is unintuitive as tracking the index is assumed to be less associated
with portfolio reallocation.

In Table 4, panel B, we perform the same regressions as performed for the full sample in
Table 3, panel B, for both of our subsamples. Similarly to our full sample, we find no
evidence of expense ratios moderating the relationship between the level of or changes in the
                        Total         Active
interest rate and RFY    or RFY    in our index fund subsample. However, for non-index
funds we do find a negative interaction term between the interest rate level and expense ratio
           Total
on RFY   , significant at the 10% level, as shown in column 5. This implies that the tendency
of high-cost funds engaging more in RFY is stronger when interest rates are low, and
decreases as interest rates rise. An alternative explanation, if high-cost funds generally follow
more active strategies, is that low interest rates act as a monitoring device for high-cost funds.
When interest rates are low, the manager needs to spend a lot of effort on identifying
underpriced, and therefore high yielding assets in order to deliver a return that justifies the
high fee.

                                     20
Panel B: Expense ratio
                                               Index funds Non-index funds
                         RFY              RFY               RFY              RFY
                                      (Total)                   (Active)                     (Total)                   (Active)
Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Interest rate level −0.100*** −0.002 −0.122*** 0.010*
                               (0.031) (0.007) (0.030) (0.005)
Int. rate level × Exp. ratio 0.141 0.001 −0.046* −0.004
                               (0.143) (0.011) (0.027) (0.005)
Yield slope −0.321*** −0.004 0.000 0.002 −0.449*** 0.017** 0.005 0.005
                              (0.042) (0.010) (0.002) (0.002) (0.056) (0.008) (0.003) (0.003)
Market illiquidity 0.039*** −0.001** −0.001*** −0.001*** 0.049*** −0.001** −0.001 −0.001***
                              (0.005) (0.001) (0.000) (0.000) (0.004) (0.000) ((−)) (0.000)
Interest rate change −0.002 0.021**
                                                      (0.010) (0.008)
Int. rate change × Exp. ratio 0.040 −0.011
                                                      (0.038) (0.012)
Lagged interest rate change 0.010 0.018*
                                                                 (0.009) (0.010)
Lagged int. rate chg. × Exp. ratio 0.001 −0.023
                                                                 (0.028) (0.020)
Expense ratio 0.105 −0.103 −0.106 −0.098 0.277 0.017 0.006 0.007
                              (0.690) (0.165) (0.146) (0.145) (0.200) (0.017) (0.009) (0.010)
Fund controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
R² 0.500 0.042 0.043 0.047 0.569 0.022 0.027 0.022
N 1,138 1,115 1,115 1,115 1,875 1,816 1,816 1,816

This table presents regressions of RFY for the index and non-index fund subsamples. Observations are at the
fund-quarter level. Dependent variables are total RFY and active RFY, as defined in equations (2) and (3)
respectively. In panel A, macroeconomic independent variables are interest rate level (the one-year Treasury
yield), yield slope (difference between the thirty-year and one-year Treasury yield), market illiquidity proxied
by the volatility Index (VIX) from the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), interest rate change
(difference in the one-year Treasury yield between a quarter t and its predecessor t-1) and lagged interest rate
change (difference in the one-year Treasury yield between the previous quarter t-1 and its predecessor t-2). All
regressions in panel A include fund fixed effects, to control for a changing fund population over time. In panel
B, we add expense ratio (calculated as the value weighted average across all share classes) and interact it with
the interest rate variable used in each regression. All regressions in panel B further include the following fund
level controls: age (log), percentage invested in safe assets (defined as cash and government securities), TNA
(log) and a Lipper objective code dummy. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the fund and quarter levels
and presented in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level,
respectively.

As interest rates and corporate bond yields rise, the manager can deliver a sufficient return
without having to identify underpriced assets. This could explain why the relationship only
exists for non-index funds, as index-funds do not claim to identify mispriced assets.

Another possible explanation as to why we only identify this relationship for non-index funds
is the difference in investor expectations between index and non-index funds. Investors in
passive funds might evaluate fund performance based on how well it tracks an index, rather
than excess returns above the index, in line with the findings of Choi et al. (2026). This would
result in a weaker incentive for index funds to RFY. Additionally, passive bond funds tend to
have lower expense ratios than active funds (Choi et al., 2026). Thus, their return net of fees
will face less pressure when interest rates fall, compared to active funds, as they have a
                                                                                                 Active
greater margin between the interest rate and their expense ratio. When studying RFY    we
find no significant interaction effects for either subsample, consistent with the findings for our
full sample.

                                     21
Table 5
Regression of RFY — Retail & non-retail funds

Panel A: Macroeconomic variables
                                                 Retail funds Non-retail funds
                         RFY              RFY               RFY              RFY
                                      (Total)                   (Active)                     (Total)                   (Active)
Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Interest rate level −0.101*** 0.008 −0.130*** 0.001
                               (0.034) (0.005) (0.030) (0.003)
Yield slope −0.351*** 0.013 0.000 0.003 −0.413*** 0.004 0.003 0.003
                              (0.059) (0.009) (0.005) (0.004) (0.057) (0.006) (0.002) (0.002)
Market illiquidity 0.042*** −0.001 −0.001 -0.001*** 0.047*** −0.001*** −0.001*** −0.001***
                              (0.005) (0.001) ((−)) (0.000) (0.005) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
Interest rate change 0.018** 0.007
                                                      (0.007) (0.004)
Lagged interest rate change 0.019*** 0.004
                                                                 (0.003) (0.003)
Fund FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
R² 0.846 0.125 0.143 0.142 0.850 0.218 0.220 0.219
N 363 348 348 348 3,497 3,350 3,350 3,350
Continued.

5.4.2 Retail & Non-Retail Funds
In this section, we divide our full sample into retail and non-retail funds. Following the
definition used by Choi and Kronlund (2018), we define retail funds as those with at least
80% of their assets in retail share classes, and the remainder as non-retail funds. In Table 5,
panel A, we conduct the same regressions as those presented in Table 2 for both subsamples.
It should be noted that our full sample only consists of 25 unique retail funds.

                                                                                                 Total
When examining the relationship between the macroeconomic environment and RFY    in
column 1 and 5, the relationships identified for our full sample are consistent across both
subsamples, indicating that both retail and non-retail funds conduct RFY. However, the
                                                                                                                          Active
significant positive relationship between both interest rate change variables and RFY
identified in the full sample only appears in the retail fund subsample, indicating that the
results in Table 2 are primarily driven by retail funds. This implies that when interest rates
rise retail funds actively increase their risk, and when interest rates fall, they decrease their
risk. These results contradict our expectation that retail funds would exhibit a greater degree
of RFY. However, they must be interpreted with caution, given the small sample of retail
funds and few fund-quarter observations.

In Table 5, panel B, we perform the same regressions as performed for the full sample in
Table 3, panel B, for both of our subsamples. Consistent with the results in our full sample,
we find no evidence of a significant interaction between the level of or change in interest rates
                                     Total            Active
and expense ratio on RFY   , or RFY    , in either subsample. As shown in column 1 retail
                                                                                                                             Total
funds exhibit a strongly significant negative relationship between expense ratio and RFY   .
This implies that retail funds with higher expense ratios take on less risk. However, these
results must once again be interpreted with caution, due to the small sample size and few
observations. For non-retail funds, the relationship is strongly significant and positive.

                                     22
Panel B: Expense Ratio
                                                 Retail funds Non-retail funds
                         RFY              RFY               RFY              RFY
                                      (Total)                   (Active)                     (Total)                   (Active)
Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Interest rate level −0.168*** 0.014** −0.094*** 0.005
                               (0.036) (0.006) (0.028) (0.005)
Int. rate level × Exp. ratio 0.015 −0.002 −0.034 −0.007
                               (0.029) (0.004) (0.037) (0.006)
Yield slope −0.411*** 0.020** 0.001 0.004 −0.383*** 0.007 0.003 0.004*
                               (0.071) (0.010) (0.005) (0.004) (0.046) (0.006) (0.002) (0.002)
Market illiquidity 0.040*** −0.002 −0.002*** −0.002** 0.047*** −0.001*** −0.001*** −0.001***
                              (0.006) (0.001) (0.000) (0.001) (0.004) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
Interest rate change 0.015 0.010
                                                      (0.009) (0.007)
Int. rate change × Exp. ratio 0.025 −0.007
                                                      (0.015) (0.020)
Lagged interest rate change 0.027** 0.017**
                                                                 (0.010) (0.008)
Lagged int. rate chg. × Exp. ratio −0.004 −0.031
                                                                 (0.016) (0.022)
Expense ratio −0.386*** 0.022 0.009 0.011 0.987*** 0.007 −0.008 −0.006
                              (0.131) (0.020) (0.010) (0.012) (0.175) (0.031) (0.024) (0.024)
Fund controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
R² 0.685 0.081 0.118 0.101 0.603 0.019 0.020 0.021
N 339 325 325 325 2,674 2,606 2,606 2,606

This table presents regressions of RFY for the retail and non-retail fund subsamples. Observations are at the
fund-quarter level. Dependent variables are total RFY and active RFY, as defined in equations (2) and (3)
respectively. In panel A, macroeconomic independent variables are interest rate level (the one-year Treasury
yield), yield slope (difference between the thirty-year and one-year Treasury yield), market illiquidity proxied
by the volatility Index (VIX) from the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), interest rate change
(difference in the one-year Treasury yield between a quarter t and its predecessor t-1) and lagged interest rate
change (difference in the one-year Treasury yield between the previous quarter t-1 and its predecessor t-2). All
regressions in panel A include fund fixed effects, to control for a changing fund population over time. In panel
B, we add expense ratio (calculated as the value weighted average across all share classes) and interact it with
the interest rate variable used in each regression. All regressions in panel B further include the following fund
level controls: age (log), percentage invested in safe assets (defined as cash and government securities), TNA
(log) and a Lipper objective code dummy. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the fund and quarter levels
and presented in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level,
respectively.

5.4.3 Different Macroeconomic Environments
To study whether RFY differs across different interest rates regimes, we divide our subsample
into two time periods. We look at the years 2019–2021 when interest rates initially decreased
to then remain close to 0%. We compare this time period to the years 2018 & 2022–2024,
when interest rates were mostly increasing. It should be noted that for the 2019–2021
subsample there are only 12 quarters. There is thus a risk that our method of two-way
clustering standard errors at both the fund and quarter level overstates the significance of
results. In Appendix C, we run the same regressions while only clustering standard errors at
the fund level, with no substantial differences in results.

                                     23
Table 6
Regression of RFY — Different macroeconomic environments

Panel A: Macroeconomic variables
                                            2019–2021 2018 & 2022–2024
                         RFY              RFY               RFY              RFY
                                      (Total)                   (Active)                     (Total)                   (Active)
Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Interest rate level 0.218** −0.002 −0.204*** −0.003
                               (0.093) (0.010) (0.048) (0.004)
Yield slope −0.116 0.003 0.003 0.004 −0.437*** −0.001 0.003 0.003
                              (0.140) (0.010) (0.007) (0.007) (0.047) (0.006) (0.003) (0.003)
Market illiquidity 0.060*** −0.001*** −0.001* −0.001*** 0.036*** −0.000 −0.001 −0.000
                              (0.003) (0.000) (0.001) (0.000) (0.004) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
Interest rate change 0.008 0.007**
                                                      (0.013) (0.003)
Lagged interest rate change 0.006 −0.000
                                                                 (0.003) (0.003)
Fund FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
R² 0.904 0.260 0.260 0.260 0.844 0.253 0.254 0.253
N 1,685 1,606 1,606 1,606 2,170 2,089 2,089 2,089
Continued.

In Table 6, panel A, we conduct the same regressions as those presented in Table 2, for both
of our subsamples. The results for the subsample covering the years 2018 & 2022–2024,
when interest rates are mostly increasing, is similar to the full sample. We find a negative
                                                                    Total
significant relationship between interest rate level and RFY    and further similarities when
looking at yield slope and market illiquidity.

However, column 1 shows that between 2019–2021, when interest rates were low and
                                                                                                                       Total
decreasing, there was a positive relationship between the interest rate level and RFY   ,
                                                                                                                           Total
significant at the 5% level. This suggests that rising interest rates resulted in more RFY   , an
unintuitive result. One possible explanation for the lack of a negative relationship is that funds
may not have engaged in RFY during this time period. A reason behind this could be that
investors RFY when interest rates fall below levels that they are used to, due to reference
dependency (Lian et al., 2019). As the previous decade was ridden by historically low interest
rates, fund managers may not have been pressured to RFY, since investors already were used
to these low interest rate levels. However, the two previous years leading up to the decrease in
2019 had seen a constant increase in the interest rates, the first documented instance since the
2008 financial crisis. It could be argued that two years is enough for the reference point to
update and no longer be the past decade. In that instance, the positive relationship between
     Total
RFY    and interest rate level during 2019–2021, goes against the expected relationship that
fund managers RFY when interest rates fall below investors’ historical reference points.

                                                                                                     Total
Another possible explanation is that the relationship between interest rate level and RFY    is
caused by a systematic relationship between the interest rate level and the spread between
investment grade corporate bond yields and Treasury yields, which could be positive during
2019–2021, but negative for the full sample. This would imply that the positive relationship is
not a phenomenon directly linked to fund manager behaviour. Fund managers might still
engage in RFY, but the effect of their behaviour is muted by the changing spread. In
Appendix A, Table 8, we run the same regression when controlling for bond premium and
find that the relationship becomes negative and no longer significant.

                                     24
Panel B: Expense ratio
                                            2019–2021 2018 & 2022–2024
                         RFY              RFY               RFY              RFY
                                      (Total)                   (Active)                     (Total)                   (Active)
Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Interest rate level 0.269*** 0.026 −0.173*** −0.002
                               (0.085) (0.020) (0.042) (0.005)
Int. rate level × Exp. ratio −0.118** −0.052* −0.020 −0.000
                               (0.052) (0.026) (0.028) (0.008)
Yield slope −0.113 0.012 0.006 0.005 −0.406*** 0.001 0.004 0.003
                              (0.131) (0.007) (0.007) (0.008) (0.037) (0.007) (0.004) (0.004)
Market illiquidity 0.059*** −0.001*** −0.001** −0.001*** 0.036*** −0.000 −0.001** −0.000
                              (0.002) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.004) (0.000) (0.000) ((−))
Interest rate change −0.001 0.007*
                                                      (0.019) (0.003)
Int. rate change × Exp. ratio 0.013 0.005
                                                      (0.033) (0.009)
Lagged interest rate change 0.041*** 0.003
                                                                 (0.010) (0.002)
Lagged int. rate chg. × Exp. ratio −0.081*** −0.010
                                                                 (0.025) (0.011)
Expense ratio 0.618** 0.034 −0.001 −0.021 0.532*** −0.009 −0.012 −0.006
                              (0.207) (0.023) (0.034) (0.033) (0.092) (0.035) (0.012) (0.012)
Fund controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
R² 0.704 0.046 0.033 0.041 0.361 0.011 0.014 0.012
N 1,276 1,242 1,242 1,242 1,737 1,689 1,689 1,689

This table presents regressions of RFY for two time periods: 2019–2021, and 2018 & 2022–2024. Observations
are at the fund-quarter level. Dependent variables are total RFY and active RFY, as defined in equations (2) and
(3) respectively. In panel A, macroeconomic independent variables are interest rate level (the one-year Treasury
yield), yield slope (difference between the thirty-year and one-year Treasury yield), market illiquidity proxied
by the volatility Index (VIX) from the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), interest rate change
(difference in the one-year Treasury yield between a quarter t and its predecessor t-1) and lagged interest rate
change (difference in the one-year Treasury yield between the previous quarter t-1 and its predecessor t-2). All
regressions in panel A include fund fixed effects, to control for a changing fund population over time. In panel
B, we add expense ratio (calculated as the value weighted average across all share classes) and interact it with
the interest rate variable used in each regression. All regressions in panel B further include the following fund
level controls: age (log), percentage invested in safe assets (defined as cash and government securities), TNA
(log) and a Lipper objective code dummy. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the fund and quarter levels
and presented in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level,
respectively.

However, as discussed in section 4.2, these results must be interpreted with caution, as there
is a risk of bond premium being a bad control.

We also find that in this time period of decreasing interest rates there is no significant
                                                                Total
relationship between the yield slope and RFY   . This is the only instance where we do not
find such a relationship. One possible explanation is that during tumultuous time periods,
such as this, when interest rates rapidly decline to then remain at a constant level of almost
0%, fund managers do not take future economic outlook into consideration to the same degree
as during normal times.

In Table 6, panel B, we conduct the same regressions as those presented in Table 3, panel B,
for both of our subsamples. The results for the time period 2018 & 2022–2024 are similar to
those found in the full sample, with no significant interactions between the level of or changes
                                                       Total          Active
in the interest rate and expense ratio on RFY    or RFY    . However, for the years 2019–
2021 the results differ substantially from those of the full sample.

                                     25
As shown in column 1, we find a negative interaction between interest rate level and expense
                  Total
ratio on RFY   , significant at the 5% level. We also find a positive significant relationship
                                             Total
between expense ratio and RFY   . This indicates that while more expensive funds in general
take on more risk, the relationship is stronger in low interest rate periods. Similarly, we find a
                                                                                                         Active
negative interaction between interest rate level and expense ratio on RFY    , significant at
the 10% level, indicating that the lower the interest rate level, the more the most expensive
funds actively increase the riskiness of their holdings. While we find no evidence of an
interaction between the change in interest rate over the current quarter and expense ratio on
      Active
RFY    , we find a strongly significant negative interaction effect between the lagged interest
rate change and the expense ratio. The difference between both variables of interest rate
change is reasonable, given the illiquid nature of the corporate bond market fund managers
can not immediately react to changes in the interest rate. The significant negative interaction
effect implies that when interest rates drop, the most expensive funds will increase the
riskiness of their holdings the most.

Taken together, these findings imply that during a period of falling and low interest rates,
expense ratio does moderate the relationship between interest rate variables and RFY, such
that more expensive funds conduct more RFY. Notably, these results are only found in this
subsample. There are two primary mechanisms that may explain this pattern.

The first is reference dependency. In 2018 & 2022–2024, the one-year Treasury yield was
higher than it had been in the years prior. If investors engage in RFY due to reference
dependency, as shown by Lian et al. (2019), there would be a relatively low pressure to
conduct RFY during these time periods. A corporate bond mutual fund manager would be
able to outperform past returns, serving as reference points, without taking on additional risk.
In contrast, during 2019–2021, interest rates were generally declining. Under these
conditions, managers would find it increasingly hard to deliver returns in line with previous
years without increasing the riskiness of their holdings, creating a strong incentive to RFY.
This effect may be amplified for more expensive funds, who face greater pressure to deliver
returns that satisfy investors’ expectations, based on reference points, to justify the high cost
and avoid large outflows. If managers receive bonuses based on fund performance compared
to previous years’ performance, this effect would be further reinforced.

The second mechanism is a principal-agent problem. In 2018 & 2022–2024, interest rates
were generally rising, and except for the first months of 2022 they were substantially higher
than even the 99th percentile expense ratio found in our sample. During this time, fund
managers were able to maintain a yield above their expense ratio without increasing the
riskiness of their holdings, even as interest rates fell. Thus, the pressure from having a high
expense ratio would be limited. However, during 2019–2021, interest rates fell towards and
remained at the level of most corporate bond mutual funds’ expense ratios. In this
environment, there is a strong pressure on the managers of the most expensive funds to
increase their yield, to avoid it falling below the expense ratio and delivering a negative net
return to their investors. This creates more pronounced principal-agent problems, as managers
may increase the riskiness of their holdings to avoid delivering a negative net return.

                                     26
6. Robustness Checks

To assess the validity of our findings we perform a series of robustness checks. Following Di
Maggio and Kacperczyk (2017), we first test whether our results are robust when also
considering that the population of corporate bond mutual funds change over time. A potential
explanation for the significant negative relationship between the interest rate level and
     Total
RFY   is changes in the fund population. Times of low interest rate may push low yield
funds to exit the market, as they struggle to deliver positive returns net of fees, while investor
demand for higher returns result in more high-yielding funds entering the market. To address
this concern, we limit our sample to only those funds that report their holdings both in Q1
2018 and Q4 2024, and then rerun the regressions of macroeconomic variables on RFY
performed in Table 2. This gives us a sample consisting of 73 corporate bond mutual funds.
                                                                                                                                 Total
As shown in Appendix B, Table 9, the relationship between the interest rate level and RFY
remains negative, significant at the 1% level and of similar economic magnitude as in Table
2. This suggests that the relationship is not driven by a changing corporate bond mutual fund
population.

We expect this robustness test to have the greatest impact on our 2019–2021
subsample, given the turbulent environment on the fixed income market following COVID-
19. A potential explanation for the identified positive relationship between the interest rate
                Total
level and RFY    during this period is that the shock caused by the pandemic pushed the
riskiest funds out of the market, while the safe, low-yielding funds survived. If that is the
case, the low interest rate regime that followed the shock would primarily be populated by
low-yielding funds, mechanically generating the identified positive relationship. To test for
this, we rerun the regressions performed in Table 6 for the time period 2019–2021, only on
the subsample of surviving funds. As shown in Appendix B, Table 10 and 11 our results for
this subsample are robust to restricting the analysis to only surviving funds. The relationship
                                             Total
between the interest rate level and RFY    remains positive and significant at a 10% level,
indicating that this finding is not caused by fund exits or entries. Similarly, the identified
                                                                                                         Total
negative interactions between expense ratio and interest rate level on RFY   , and expense
                                                    Active
ratio and lagged interest rate change on RFY    during this period remain significant at the
1% and 5% level respectively.

To ensure that our results are not driven by outliers, we also rerun all the regressions, after
winsorizing all independent variables at the 1% level. Our measures of RFY are not
winsorized, as they are already constructed using the winsorized variable bid yield. We find
that winsorizing does not materially alter the regression results. There are only two changes of
interest. Firstly, the identified negative interaction between expense ratio and interest rate
                  Total
level on RFY   , for non-index funds, shown in Table 4, panel B, becomes non-significant,
suggesting that the relationship might have been driven by outliers. Secondly, we find a
                                                                                              Active
positive interaction effect between expense ratio and interest rate change on RFY    for
retail funds. This unintuitive result is most likely due to the small sample size and the fact that
                                  Active
interest rate change and RFY    appear contemporarily. Since retail funds still do not exhibit
any significant interaction effect between expense ratio and the lagged interest rate change,
which provides a cleaner interpretation of funds’ responses to interest rate movement, we
interpret the result with caution and do not consider it strong evidence of an actual economic
relation. Overall, our results remain robust, suggesting our findings are not driven by extreme
observations.

                                     27
Finally, as discussed briefly in section 5.4.3, there is a risk that two-way clustered standard
errors for the period 2019–2021 overstate the significance due to the limited number of
quarters. We therefore rerun all regressions for this time period using one-way clustered
standard errors at the fund level. As shown in Appendix C, our findings remain qualitatively
unchanged. While the statistical significance of the interaction between interest rate change
                              Active
and expense ratio on RFY    decreases from the 1% level to the 5% level, the interaction
                                                             Total
between interest rate level and expense ratio on RFY    becomes significant at the 1% level
rather than the 5% level. The economic magnitude of all relationships remains unchanged,
suggesting that the findings reported in section 5.4.3 are not driven by our choice of
clustering.

7. Conclusion

In this paper, we examine the existence and determinants of RFY in U.S. investment grade
corporate bond mutual funds. Consistent with prior literature, we identify an inverse
relationship between the interest rate and the riskiness of portfolio holdings, implying that
corporate bond mutual funds do engage in RFY. However, we find no such relationship
between the level of, or change in, the interest rate and our measure of active RFY. The stark
contrast in results between our two measures of RFY indicates that the relationship between
interest rates and riskiness does not reflect active trading decisions made by fund managers.
Instead, it may partly reflect market-wide patterns, such as changes in the market spread
between investment grade corporate bonds and U.S. Treasuries. We further study whether
there is a fee-pressure channel, such that high-cost funds engage more in RFY when interest
rates are low or decreasing. While we do find a positive relationship between expense ratios
and total RFY, we do not find any evidence that expense ratios moderate the relationship
between interest rates and RFY. Thus, a more prudent interpretation of our results is that
high-cost funds hold higher-yielding portfolios at all times.

Our subsample analysis reveals no major differences between index and non-index funds. The
fact that index funds also exhibit a negative relation between interest rates and total RFY
supports the interpretation that total RFY is caused by market-wide patterns rather than active
trading decisions. However, this must be interpreted with caution, as passive bond funds in
many aspects behave similar to active bond funds (Choi et al., 2026). Likewise, the division
into retail and non-retail funds reveal no major differences between the two subsamples.
However, we do find evidence of expense ratios negatively moderating the relationship
between interest rates and both total and active RFY between 2019–2021. This suggests that
the fee-pressure channel only is active when interest rates are lower than historical reference
points and close to expense ratios.

A limitation of our paper is that we only study one measure of portfolio riskiness. Purchasing
higher-yielding bonds is not the only option a corporate bond fund manager has to increase
return-variance in pursuit of a higher gross return. An alternative way to achieve similar
results would be to reduce diversification by concentrating corporate bond holdings to fewer
business sectors. Studying how portfolio diversification relates to interest rates would thus be
an interesting extension to our paper. Furthermore, our evidence of the relationship between
expense ratios and RFY is from a short time period following the COVID-19 outbreak and
could be a result of the unusual market environment. It would be interesting to extend our
findings by examining whether other periods of low and declining interest rates exhibit
similar patterns.

                                     28
References

Andonov, Aleksandar, Rob M. M. J. Bauer, and K. J. Martijn Cremers, 2017, Pension Fund
Asset Allocation and Liability Discount Rates, Review of Financial Studies 30, 2555–2595.

Becker, Bo, and Victoria Ivashina, 2015, Reaching for Yield in the Bond Market, Journal of
Finance 70, 1863–1902.

Bernanke, Ben S., 2013a, Long-Term Interest Rates, Speech at the Annual
Monetary/Macroeconomics Conference: The Past and Future of Monetary Policy, March 1,
2013, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Available at:
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20130301a.htm

Bernanke, Ben S., 2013b, The Economic Outlook, Testimony before the Joint
Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, Washington D.C., May 22, 2013, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Available
at: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20130522a.htm

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, 2014, Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy on Financial
Institutions, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2014(1), 155–204.

Choi, Jaewon, and Mathias Kronlund, 2018, Reaching for Yield in Corporate Bond Mutual
Funds, Review of Financial Studies 31, 1930–1965.

Choi, Jaewon, and Matthew Richardson, 2016, The volatility of a firm's assets and the
leverage effect, Journal of Financial Economics 121, 255–274.

Choi, Jaewon, K. J. Martijn Cremers, and Timothy B. Riley, 2026, Active versus Passive
Management of Bonds (and why passive bond management is an oxymoron), SSRN Working
Paper, 3557235.

Crane, Alan D., and Kevin Crotty, 2018, Passive versus Active Fund Performance: Do Index
Funds Have Skill?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 53, 33–64.

Dell'Ariccia, Giovanni, Luc Laeven, and Gustavo A. Suarez, 2017, Bank Leverage and
Monetary Policy's Risk-Taking Channel: Evidence from the United States, Journal of Finance
72, 613–654.

Di Maggio, Marco, and Marcin Kacperczyk, 2017, The unintended consequences of the zero
lower bound policy, Journal of Financial Economics 123, 59–80.

Elias, Maxim, Galla Salganik-Shoshan, and Mieszko Mazur, 2017, Comparing performance
sensitivity of retail and institutional mutual funds’ investment flows, Financial Research
Letters 22, 66–73.

Evans, Richard B., and Rüdiger Fahlenbrach, 2012, Institutional Investors and Mutual Fund
Governance: Evidence from Retail-Institutional Fund Twins, Review of Financial Studies 25,
3530–3571.

                                     29
Goldstein, Itay, Hao Jiang, and David T. Ng, 2017, Investor flows and fragility in corporate
bond funds, Journal of Financial Economics 126, 592–613.

Gomes, Francisco, Cameron Peng, Oksana Smirnova, and Ning Zhu, 2025, Reaching for
yield: Evidence from households, Journal of Financial Economics 168, 104057.

Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2007, The U.S. Treasury yield
curve: 1961 to the present, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291–2304.

Huang, Jing-Zhi, Peipei Li, Ying Wang, Yuan Wang, Xiangkun Yao, and Licheng Zhang,
2025, Do investors reach for yield? Evidence from corporate bond mutual fund flows, Journal
of Empirical Finance 83, 101625.

Lian, Chen, Yueran Ma, and Carmen Wang, 2019, Low Interest Rates and Risk-Taking:
Evidence from Individual Investment Decisions, Review of Financial Studies 32, 2107–2148.

Stein, Jeremy C., 2013, Overheating in credit markets – origins, measurement, and policy
responses, Speech at the “Restoring household financial stability after the Great Recession –
why household balance sheets matter” research symposium, February 7, 2013, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Svensson, Lars E. O., 1994, Estimating and Interpreting Forward Rates: Sweden 1992-4,
NBER Working Paper 4871.

                                     30
Appendix A: Controlling for Bond Premium

Table 7
Regression of RFY on macroeconomic variables – controlling for bond premium

                                RFY (Total) RFY (Active)
 Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4)
 Interest rate level 0.000 −0.001
                                    (0.012) (0.003)
 Yield slope −0.042* −0.001 0.002 0.002
                                   (0.024) (0.007) (0.003) (0.003)
 Market illiquidity 0.003 −0.000 −0.001 −0.001
                                   (0.002) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
 Bond premium 0.986*** −0.015 −0.005 −0.012
                                   (0.044) (0.017) (0.014) (0.015)
 Interest rate change 0.008**
                                                                             (0.003)
 Lagged interest rate change 0.005*
                                                                                              (0.003)
 Fund FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes
 R² 0.893 0.201 0.203 0.202
 N 3,863 3,701 3,701 3,701

This table presents regression estimates of RFY on macroeconomic variables as presented in Table 2, while
controlling for bond premium, proxied by the ICE BofA U.S. Corporate Index Option-Adjusted Spread.
Observations are at the fund-quarter level. Dependent variables are total RFY and active RFY, as defined in
equations (2) and (3) respectively. Independent variables are interest rate level (the one-year Treasury yield),
yield slope (difference between the thirty-year and one-year Treasury yield), market illiquidity proxied by the
volatility Index (VIX) from the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), interest rate change (difference in
the one-year Treasury yield between a quarter t and its predecessor t-1) and lagged interest rate change
(difference in the one-year Treasury yield between the previous quarter t-1 and its predecessor t-2). All
regressions include fund fixed effects, to control for a changing fund population over time. Standard errors are
two-way clustered at the fund and quarter levels and presented in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

                                     31
Table 8
Regression of RFY on macroeconomic variables 2019–2021 – controlling for bond premium

                                RFY (Total) RFY (Active)
 Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4)
 Interest rate level −0.033 0.007
                                    (0.038) (0.012)
 Yield slope −0.063 0.001 −0.003 −0.008
                                   (0.044) (0.011) (0.009) (0.011)
 Market illiquidity 0.002 0.001 0.000 0.001
                                   (0.003) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
 Bond premium 0.995*** −0.035* −0.027 −0.034
                                   (0.049) (0.019) (0.015) (0.020)
 Interest rate change −0.001
                                                                             (0.012)
 Lagged interest rate change 0.010**
                                                                                              (0.003)
 Fund FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes
 R² 0.923 0.261 0.261 0.262
 N 1,685 1,606 1,606 1,606

This table presents regression estimates of RFY on macroeconomic variables for the time period 2019–2021, as
presented in Table 6, Panel A, while controlling for bond premium, proxied by the ICE BofA U.S. Corporate
Index Option-Adjusted Spread. Observations are at the fund-quarter level. Dependent variables are total RFY
and active RFY, as defined in equations (2) and (3) respectively. Independent variables are interest rate level
(the one-year Treasury yield), yield slope (difference between the thirty-year and one-year Treasury
yield), market illiquidity proxied by the volatility Index (VIX) from the Chicago Board Options Exchange
(CBOE), interest rate change (difference in the one-year Treasury yield between a quarter t and its predecessor
t-1) and lagged interest rate change (difference in the one-year Treasury yield between the previous quarter t-1
and its predecessor t-2). All regressions include fund fixed effects, to control for a changing fund population
over time. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the fund and quarter levels and presented in parentheses. *,
** and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

                                     32
Appendix B: Survivors

Table 9
Regression of RFY on macroeconomic variables – only survivors

                                RFY (Total) RFY (Active)
 Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4)
 Interest rate level −0.145*** −0.000
                                    (0.028) (0.004)
 Yield slope −0.436*** 0.002 0.003 0.003
                                   (0.055) (0.006) (0.002) (0.002)
 Market illiquidity 0.046*** −0.001** −0.001** −0.001**
                                   (0.004) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
 Interest rate change 0.004
                                                                             (0.003)
 Lagged interest rate change 0.002
                                                                                              (0.003)
 Fund FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes
 R² 0.837 0.125 0.126 0.125
 N 2,002 1,958 1,958 1,958

This table presents regression estimates of RFY on macroeconomic variables, as presented in Table 2, for the
subsample of surviving mutual funds. Observations are at the fund-quarter level. Dependent variables are total
RFY and active RFY, as defined in equations (2) and (3) respectively. Independent variables are interest rate
level (the one-year Treasury yield), yield slope (difference between the thirty-year and one-year Treasury
yield), market illiquidity proxied by the volatility Index (VIX) from the Chicago Board Options Exchange
(CBOE), interest rate change (difference in the one-year Treasury yield between a quarter t and its predecessor
t-1) and lagged interest rate change (difference in the one-year Treasury yield between the previous quarter t-1
and its predecessor t-2). All regressions include fund fixed effects, to control for a changing fund population
over time. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the fund and quarter levels and presented in parentheses. *,
** and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

                                     33
Table 10
Regression of RFY on macroeconomic variables 2019–2021 – only survivors

                                RFY (Total) RFY (Active)
 Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4)
 Interest rate level 0.192* 0.003
                                    (0.100) (0.011)
 Yield slope −0.149 0.001 −0.004 −0.003
                                   (0.150) (0.009) (0.009) (0.011)
 Market illiquidity 0.059*** −0.001** −0.001 −0.001**
                                   (0.003) (0.000) (0.001) (0.000)
 Interest rate change 0.008
                                                                             (0.014)
 Lagged interest rate change 0.006
                                                                                                          ((−))
 Fund FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes
 R² 0.883 0.165 0.165 0.165
 N 859 834 834 834

This table presents regression estimates of RFY on macroeconomic variables for the time period 2019–2021, as
presented in Table 6, panel A, for the subsample of surviving mutual funds. Observations are at the fund-quarter
level. Dependent variables are total RFY and active RFY, as defined in equations (2) and (3) respectively.
Independent variables are interest rate level (the one-year Treasury yield), yield slope (difference between the
thirty-year and one-year Treasury yield), market illiquidity proxied by the volatility Index (VIX) from the
Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), interest rate change (difference in the one-year Treasury yield
between a quarter t and its predecessor t-1) and lagged interest rate change (difference in the one-year Treasury
yield between the previous quarter t-1 and its predecessor t-2). All regressions include fund fixed effects, to
control for a changing fund population over time. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the fund and quarter
levels and presented in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level,
respectively.

                                     34
Table 11
Regression of RFY on expense ratio 2019–2021 – only survivors

                                RFY (Total) RFY (Active)
 Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4)
 Interest rate level 0.283*** 0.042
                                    (0.084) (0.025)
 Int. rate level × Exp. ratio −0.163*** −0.060
                                    (0.032) (0.037)
 Yield slope −0.144 0.014 −0.001 −0.006
                                   (0.136) ((−)) (0.009) (0.013)
 Market illiquidity 0.059*** −0.000*** −0.001 −0.001**
                                   (0.001) (0.000) (0.001) (0.000)
 Interest rate change −0.016
                                                                             (0.019)
 Int. rate change × Exp. ratio 0.012
                                                                             (0.040)
 Lagged interest rate change 0.039***
                                                                                              (0.010)
 Lagged int. rate chg. × Exp. ratio −0.065**
                                                                                              (0.024)
 Expense ratio 0.442 0.010 −0.033 −0.049
                                   (0.292) (0.034) (0.057) (0.057)
 Fund controls Yes Yes Yes Yes
 R² 0.690 0.039 0.019 0.025
 N 685 669 669 669

This table presents regressions of RFY on expense ratio (calculated as the value weighted average across all
share classes), with interaction terms between expense ratio and the interest rate variable used in each regression,
for the time period 2019–2021, as presented in Table 6, panel B. The subsample is limited to the surviving
mutual funds. Observations are at the fund-quarter level. Dependent variables are total RFY and active RFY, as
defined in equations (2) and (3) respectively. Independent macroeconomic variables are interest rate level (the
one-year Treasury yield), yield slope (difference between the thirty-year and one-year Treasury yield), market
illiquidity proxied by the volatility Index (VIX) from the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), interest
rate change (difference in the one-year Treasury yield between a quarter t and its predecessor t-1) and lagged
interest rate change (difference in the one-year Treasury yield between the previous quarter t-1 and its
predecessor t-2). Fund level control variables include age (log), percentage invested in safe assets (defined as
cash and government securities), TNA (log) and a Lipper objective code dummy. Standard errors are two-way
clustered at the fund and quarter levels and presented in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

                                     35
Appendix C: One-way Clustering

Table 12
Regression of RFY on macroeconomic variables 2019–2021 – one-way clustering

                                RFY (Total) RFY (Active)
 Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4)
 Interest rate level 0.218*** −0.002
                                    (0.017) (0.009)
 Yield slope −0.116*** 0.003 0.003 0.004
                                   (0.020) (0.009) (0.006) (0.007)
 Market illiquidity 0.060*** −0.001*** −0.001* −0.001***
                                   (0.001) (0.000) (0.001) (0.000)
 Interest rate change 0.008
                                                                             (0.013)
 Lagged interest rate change 0.006
                                                                                              (0.009)
 Fund FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes
 R² 0.904 0.260 0.260 0.260
 N 1,685 1,606 1,606 1,606

This table presents regression estimates of RFY on macroeconomic variables for the time period 2019–2021, as
presented in Table 6, panel A. Observations are at the fund-quarter level. Dependent variables are total RFY and
active RFY, as defined in equations (2) and (3) respectively. Independent variables are interest rate level (the
one-year Treasury yield), yield slope (difference between the thirty-year and one-year Treasury yield), market
illiquidity proxied by the volatility Index (VIX) from the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), interest
rate change (difference in the one-year Treasury yield between a quarter t and its predecessor t-1) and lagged
interest rate change (difference in the one-year Treasury yield between the previous quarter t-1 and its
predecessor t-2). All regressions include fund fixed effects, to control for a changing fund population over time.
Standard errors are one-way clustered at the fund level and presented in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

                                     36
Table 13
Regression of RFY on expense ratio 2019–2021 – one-way clustering

                                RFY (Total) RFY (Active)
 Dependent variable: (1) (2) (3) (4)
 Interest rate level 0.269*** 0.026
                                    (0.031) (0.021)
 Int. rate level × Exp. ratio −0.118*** −0.052*
                                    (0.045) (0.028)
 Yield slope −0.113*** 0.012 0.006 0.005
                                   (0.030) (0.009) (0.007) (0.009)
 Market illiquidity 0.059*** −0.001** −0.001** −0.001***
                                   (0.002) (0.001) (0.001) (0.000)
 Interest rate change −0.001
                                                                             (0.016)
 Int. rate change × Exp. ratio 0.013
                                                                             (0.034)
 Lagged interest rate change 0.041***
                                                                                              (0.010)
 Lagged int. rate chg. × Exp. ratio −0.081**
                                                                                              (0.033)
 Expense ratio 0.618*** 0.034** −0.001 −0.021
                                   (0.189) (0.016) (0.026) (0.028)
 Fund controls Yes Yes Yes Yes
 R² 0.704 0.046 0.033 0.041
 N 1,276 1,242 1,242 1,242

This table presents regressions of RFY on expense ratio (calculated as the value weighted average across all
share classes), with interaction terms between expense ratio and the interest rate variable used in each regression,
for the time period 2019–2021, as presented in Table 6, panel B. Observations are at the fund-quarter level.
Dependent variables are total RFY and active RFY, as defined in equations (2) and (3) respectively. Independent
macroeconomic variables are interest rate level (the one-year Treasury yield), yield slope (difference between
the thirty-year and one-year Treasury yield), market illiquidity proxied by the volatility Index (VIX) from the
Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), interest rate change (difference in the one-year Treasury yield
between a quarter t and its predecessor t-1) and lagged interest rate change (difference in the one-year Treasury
yield between the previous quarter t-1 and its predecessor t-2). Fund level control variables include age (log),
percentage invested in safe assets (defined as cash and government securities), TNA (log) and a Lipper objective
code dummy. Standard errors are one-way clustered at the fund level and presented in parentheses. *, ** and ***
represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

                                     37
Appendix D: AI Disclosure

We have used Claude, Gemini and ChatGPT to aid us in the coding process. Claude has also
been used to support the formatting of tables. All AI output has been individually checked to
ensure correctness. No AI-model has been used to generate or edit any text.

                                     38