STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS

Bachelor Thesis in Finance, Spring 2009.

  Performance Persistence, Fund characteristics and
 Initial Fund Performance in Swedish Mutual Funds

                                                      a                      b
                    PHILIP EMTEMARK  and DANNY LIU

                                 Abstract

   We examine performance persistence of 75 actively managed Swedish mutual funds during the
   period 1998 to 2008, employing the following three econometric models: CAPM, Fama-French
   3-factor model and Carhart 4-factor model. We find neither outperformance of the market index
   net of fees nor evidence of performance persistence. We also investigate whether two fund
   groups (small cap funds and funds offered by large commercial banks) earn higher return than
   their counterpart funds and we find no evidence of different excess returns. Additionally, we
   study whether Swedish mutual funds offer higher initial returns compared to later returns and
   we find evidence that initial excess returns are positive with statistical significance while later
   excess returns are statistically not different from 0. Finally, we discuss the factor portfolio (size,
   book-to-market and momentum) effects on the Swedish equity market. We find no evidence
   that the size- and book-to-market portfolios are different from 0 on average but there are
   indications that the momentum factor portfolio is positive and statistically different from 0.

Keywords:  Mutual Fund Performance, Mutual Fund Persistence, Initial Fund Performance and Fund
Characteristics.

Tutor: Per Strömberg, Professor.

             rd
Date: June 3  13:15-17:00, 2009.

Location: Room 342.

Discussants: Malin Petersson and Josefine Sellman.

Acknowledgements:  We would like to thank our tutor Per Strömberg for his valuable input and
guidance throughout this thesis process. Furthermore, we would like to thank Magnus Rosén at
Wassum Investment Consulting  for his ideas and the contribution of our data set. Finally, we would
like to thank Roméo Tédongap for his helpful advice and technical expertise.

a
 20951@student.hhs.se
b
 21012@student.hhs.se
1. Introduction

Does active portfolio management persistently add risk-adjusted value to its investors? This
has been a key topic in the investment area of financial economics the last couple of decades
and still is a highly relevant topic today. Most of the literature on this topic has so far
concluded that investors, on average, do not receive excess risk-adjusted returns net of fees.
Also, persistence is generally short-term if there is any. However, most of this research has
been done on other equity markets than the Swedish one or employed other methods than the
ones used in this study. In relation to other studies on a similar topic, our study is an
implementation of the Carhart 4-factor model (Carhart, 1997) on the Swedish mutual fund
market.

1.1 Purpose of Study
The primary goal of this study is to examine whether actively managed mutual funds, which
primarily invest in the Swedish equity market, can persistently deliver positive risk-adjusted
excess returns net of fees to investors. To the best of our knowledge, our approach is unique
since it employs the Carhart 4-factor model to find the alpha-values of actively managed
Swedish mutual funds using regression analysis. As a result, we correct the Swedish mutual
fund returns for three of the most famous market anomalies found in the U.S. equity market:
the size factor, the book-to-market factor and the momentum factor. Moreover, using Swedish
equity data, we have created the three monthly factor portfolios adjusting for the three market
anomalies.

Additionally, as an extension to the primary goal of this paper, we investigate if mutual fund
excess returns can be explained by two mutual fund characteristics. The two characteristics
are whether the mutual fund is a small cap fund or a growth and income equity fund and
whether the mutual fund is offered by one of the four largest Swedish commercial banks
(Nordea, Handelsbanken, Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken and Swedbank) or offered by an
independent mutual fund company. This is of interest since one might suspect that there are
differences in returns that are dependent on these characteristics. According to the size
anomaly, suggested by Banz (1981), small stocks have a much higher equity premium than
stocks with larger market capitalization. Thus, we would like to see whether small cap funds
can earn high returns with high statistical significance relative to growth and income equity
funds in Sweden. Moreover, we would like to know whether mutual funds offered by large
commercial  banks  earn  lower  returns  than  funds  offered  by  independent  investment
companies. The economic reasoning to this is that independent investment firms may have
more incentive to exert more effort to produce superior returns since they might not offer
other financial products than mutual funds. Large commercial banks may on the other hand
offer mutual funds to its clients with the primary intention to earn additional profits, rather
than produce superior returns to its investors.

Furthermore, we would like to examine whether there is an initial fund performance effect.
This means that we study the risk-adjusted excess returns to mutual funds in the early days of
their existence and compare those returns to the risk-adjusted excess returns to the same funds
when they become more seasoned funds. This secondary goal of this study is achieved by
examining whether actively managed mutual funds achieve higher alpha-values during the
first two years of their existence compared to the alpha-values of later years.

Finally, we will describe our estimated factor portfolios, how they compare to foreign ones
and how adjustments could affect them.

1.2 Contribution
The implications of our study are several. Firstly, we have constructed Swedish Fama-French
factors with the additional momentum factor on a monthly basis from January 1998 to
December 2008. These factors could be used for future financial research on the Swedish
                   c
equity market  . Also, we will have a better understanding of the risk-adjusted alphas of
actively managed Swedish mutual funds for the past 11 years and the general ability to
maintain performance. We will also see to what extent the management fees of mutual funds
lower the alphas net of fees by adding back the fees. Together with the fund characteristics’
effect on returns and initial fund performance, these three contributions can serve as advice to
investors who intend to invest in Swedish mutual funds.

1.3 Outline
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of earlier
studies about persistence of actively managed mutual funds, performance of mutual funds and
initial fund returns. Section 3 gives a description of the sample fund data, fund criteria, equity
categories to construct the factor portfolios, benchmarks and the proxy for the risk-free rate.
Section 4 discusses the regression equations and the procedure to create the factor portfolios.
Section 5 discusses the regression results from the model specifications. Section 6 presents
the main conclusions of the paper and finally, section 7 presents additional research topics
that could build on the results on this paper. All tables are found in the end of this paper.

2. Previous literature

In this section, we present findings from previous studies on our research questions. We also
try to add relevant economic theory that helps explain our results. In section 2.1, we review
earlier results on mutual fund performance and persistence. The studies presented not only
cover the Swedish mutual fund market but foreign fund markets as well. In section 2.2, we
present earlier studies that relate to how mutual fund characteristics affect returns. In section
2.3, we review previous research on the performance of new mutual funds and in section 2.4
we review the market anomalies that led to the creation of factor portfolios.

2.1 Performance and Persistence
The area of mutual fund performance has been studied extensively during the past decades.
Two of the very first studies were conducted by Sharpe (1966) and Treynor and Mazuy
(1966). These articles created the intellectual framework for mutual fund performance
evaluation. Sharpe (1966) showed that the majority of U.S. mutual funds underperformed
Dow-Jones Industrials by using the reward-to-variability ratio as the measure for performance

c
 The Swedish size, book‐to‐market and momentum factors are available upon request.
evaluation. Treynor and Mazuy (1966) use a graphical curvature technique that compared
fund returns to market returns in order to study the number of mutual funds that outguess the
market. Only 1 out of 57 mutual funds was able to outguess the market according to the
author’s definition of outguessing the market. Later, Jensen (1969) studied the excess return
generated by 115 mutual funds from 1955 to 1964 in a CAPM-framework. Using regression
analysis, Jensen concluded that the average excess return – the alpha – was marginally above
0  before  management  fees  and  brokerage  commissions  and  that  fund  portfolios  were
“inferior” after expenses. Thus, the general conclusion more than four decades ago was that
most mutual funds fail to outguess and outperform the market.

Later studies find that mutual funds on average underperform the benchmark net of fees, and
gross of fees, the performance is similar to that of index on average. Several prominent
studies have argued that equity mutual funds generally underperform while the persistence of
performance is mixed. Malkiel (1995) concludes that equity mutual funds during the period
1971 to 1991 underperformed their benchmarks gross of fees and that there was considerable
performance persistence during the 1970s while there was no consistency in fund returns
during the 1980s. Gruber (1996) concludes that mutual funds on average offer negative risk-
adjusted returns and investors may be better off with index funds. Carhart (1997) uses a large
database with 1892 diversified equity funds and 16109 fund years from 1962 to 1993 to
explain persistence in mutual fund performance. The author employs CAPM and the Carhart
4-factor model to evaluate the performance of portfolios of mutual funds. When using CAPM
to evaluate the mutual fund portfolios, the alphas of the better half of mutual fund portfolios
are positive and the alphas of the worse half of mutual fund portfolios are negative. When
employing the Carhart 4-factor model, the alphas for all mutual fund portfolios are negative.
Thus, common factors in stock returns and investment expenses almost completely explain
the  underperformance  in  mutual  funds’  risk-adjusted  returns.  Overall,  the  evidence  is
consistent with market efficiency since only the best funds earn back their investment costs
while most funds underperform by the amount of their investment expenses.

There  are  also studies that have found evidence of  mutual funds outperforming their
benchmarks. Wermers (2000) finds that funds on average holds stocks that outperform the
market by 1.3% annually gross of fees but underperform the market by 1.0% annually net of
fees. 1.6% of the 2.3% return difference in the two settings is due to expenses and transaction
costs while the rest is due to underperformance of non-stock holdings. The methodology is
different from other studies mentioned here since the author decomposes the return of a fund
into six portfolios. These six portfolios convey information about how fund characteristics
and style affect returns. Otten and Bams (2002) study 506 mutual funds in 5 European
countries from 1991 to 1998. The authors find that overall, European mutual funds and small
cap funds in particular are able to earn positive after cost alphas. By adding back management
fees, 4 out of 5 countries exhibit significant outperformance at an aggregate level. The authors
employ the Carhart 4-factor model to find the alphas. This result deviates from most U.S
studies  that  argue  mutual  funds  underperform  the  market  by  the  fees  they  charge.
Furthermore, on persistence, Otten and Bams (2002) find weak evidence of persistence in
countries such as France, Italy and Germany while the U.K is the only market where mutual
funds display significant persistence.

Continuing on the topic of mutual fund persistence, the evidence is mixed. In general,
previous studies on mutual fund persistence find evidence of short-term persistence but not
long-term persistence. Grinblatt and Titman (1992) studied the persistence of mutual fund
performance between 1974 and 1984 on 279 funds. The authors split their sample of fund
returns into two sub-samples based on study period. Then, they compute the abnormal returns
for each fund during each sub-period. Finally, they estimate the slope coefficient in a cross-
sectional regression of abnormal returns computed from the later sub-period on the abnormal
returns computed from the early sub-period. The main finding is that there is performance
persistence since the positive slope coefficient of 0,281 with a p-value below 0.05 indicates
that  later  positive  alphas  to  some  extent  can  be  explained  by  past  positive  alphas.
Furthermore,  there  is  stronger  evidence  that  the  worst  performing  funds  demonstrate
consistent poor performance while the top fund returns appear to be due to chance. These
findings  are consistent with  the  idea that there are persistent differences in  fees and
transaction costs across funds. Hendricks, Patel and Zeckhauser (1993) find evidence of short-
term persistence, also known as “hot-hands” effect. During the period 1975 to 1988, the
authors argue that selecting the top performers the previous four quarters can significantly
outperform the average mutual fund. On the other side, funds that underperformed the
previous  four  quarters  –  icy  hands  –  continue  to  be  inferior  performers.  Brown  and
Goetzmann (1995) study mutual fund persistence during the period 1976-1988 using a
nonparametric methodology based on contingency tables. The authors’ data-sample includes
virtually all publicly offered open-end mutual funds. Each year, a fund is categorized as a
winner (W) if its return is above that of the median fund return and the fund is a loser (L) if
the median return is below that of the median fund. Then, the authors create four main types
of performance: (WW), (WL), (LW) and (LL) where the first letter is the performance of the
fund the actual year and the latter is the performance of the fund the following year. The key
finding is that persistence exists in eight out of twelve years of study, using cross product ratio
as the basis for measure of association. Furthermore, in some years funds tended to reverse
their performance and these reversals indicate that persistence is correlated across managers.
The implication of this is that persistence is generally not due to managers’ skills but rather a
group phenomenon. Carhart (1997) find that one-year persistence is largely due to momentum
effects. Futhermore, the author reports that the only significant persistence not explained by
common factors is that of underperformance among the worst performing mutual funds.

Previous studies of mutual fund performance in Sweden have shown that the results of mutual
fund persistence is mixed, while the only study with a clear focus on active portfolio
management  reports  that  active  management  does  indeed  provide  value  to  investors.
Dahlquist et al (2000) study a sample of 80 mutual funds of growth type and 46 mutual funds
of value type from the end of 1992 to the end of 1997. The main finding is that well
performing equity funds typically are small, have low fees and are actively managed. The
evaluation measure for the actively managed mutual funds is trading activity, and the general
conclusion is that there is a positive relation between trading activity and performance for
small equity funds while there is no such relation for larger equity funds. Furthermore,
Dahlquist et al (2000) show that there is only persistence in the performance of Money
Market funds and that momentum, contrary to many other markets, is not prevalent in the
Swedish equity market. Engström (2004) study the value of active portfolio management
among Swedish mutual funds during the period 1995 to 2000. The approach of this study is
different from our own in one aspect, since it focuses on the trading activity of the mutual
funds. The author investigates whether the mutual fund returns ex post trading activity is
better than a passively managed portfolio that is rebalanced annually. The author takes into
account the effect of conditional performance evaluation suggested by Ferson and Schadt
(1996) to allow for time-varying betas. Engström (1994) obtains evidence that there is value
in active portfolio management since he concludes that the average mutual fund outperforms
his benchmark model. More recent studies by SSE students (Bergström and Sundén, 2008)
employing the same methodology as Dahlquist et al (2000) finds that there is an insignificant
negative relationship between the number of trades and risk-adjusted return. However, since
the trades made by mutual funds are not only active trading, but also natural re-balancing, the
trading activity per se is. The latest study on mutual fund persistence that we find is the one
by Lindeen and Gros (2009). The authors report that only underperforming funds display
significant   persistence   the   last   decade   and   that   there   is   significant   persistence   in
underperformance among all size groups, except for the largest one, between 2003 and 2008.

2.2 Fund Characteristics
In the area of the relation between fund characteristics and excess returns, there is not much
evidence on whether Swedish small cap funds tend to earn different risk-adjusted returns than
funds who invest across the whole stock spectrum. In the U.S market, Holmes (2007) presents
evidence that small cap blend funds on average did outperform their benchmark during the
period from 1995 to 2004. On the other hand, small cap funds that were either of value or
growth style did not outperform the benchmark. All these results are net of fees. The study
sorted actively managed mutual funds into 9 categories and compared their performances to
index funds of the same style.

In the area of whether mutual funds offered by large commercial banks earn different returns
than those offered by other fund companies, we found no previous studies that studied this
specific issue. Our economic intuition behind this is there may be key properties of funds of
both groups that result in different excess returns. For instance, funds offered by large
commercials banks may take advantage of economies of scale in terms of administration and
research. This would lead to lower costs for each fund and would justify lower expenses for
investors and thus higher returns to investors. On the other hand, one might suspect that fund
companies that do not offer any other services than investment management have incentives
to work harder in order to earn higher returns than funds offered by banks. Since banks earn
their revenues from other financial activities as well, they might very well have lower
economic incentives to earn superior returns.

2.3 Initial fund performance
In the area of initial fund performance, Zweig (1996) took notice that new mutual funds could
earn extraordinary return, arguing that factors such as (1) the small size of the fund, (2) the
hunger of the manager and (3) the lack of need to sell equity to buy other equity all
contributed to high initial returns. Arteaga et al (1998) conducted the first extensive research
paper in this area of study, concluding techniques such as incubation and selective attention
accumulated superior early returns to new funds. Using these returns as evidence, these new
funds  are  marketed  aggressively  to  the  public  and  after  large  inflows  of  cash,  their
performance generally revert to median performance quickly. Wisen and Chiang (2006) build
on the incubation argument by Arteaga et al (1998), but add favoritism (one type of selective
attention), the ability to receive preferential IPOs, as another key factor. The key results of the
study are that incubation and favoritism (especially considering the IPO market conditions in
the 1990s) are factors that help amplify the returns of new funds significantly. Regarding
studies on initial fund performance in the Swedish market, we have not found any.

2.4 Size, Book  to  Market and Momentum Anomalies
All three factor portfolios were created due to market anomalies found in the U.S equity
market. Banz (1981) documented that the size factor explained the cross-sectional variation in
average returns better than the market risk in the CAPM-framework. By studying U.S stocks
from 1936 to 1975, the author found that smaller stocks would earn substantially higher
returns than large stocks. Rosenberg, Reid and Lanstein (1985) documented that there is a
positive relationship between book-to-market equity value rations and average returns. Later,
Arshanapalli, Coggin and Nelson (2002) document this market anomaly on five other non-
U.S. equity markets, indicating that this might be a global anomaly. Fama and French (1992)
is one of the first studies  to adjust for these common factors and the process of creating the
FF-factors are thoroughly explained in Fama and French (1995).

A third type of market anomaly, momentum, was originally discovered by Grinblatt and
Titman (1993). This anomaly is a tendency for rising asset prices during one period to
continue to rise in the upcoming period. For instance, Grinblatt and Titman (1993) reported
that stocks with strong past performance continued to outperform stocks with poor past
performance the current period with an average excess return of 1% per month. For instance,
several researchers have attempted to explain the momentum anomaly. Jegadeesh and Titman
(1993) argued that the momentum effect is consistent with delayed price reaction to firm-
specific information. Later, Barberis et al (1997) have argued that investors overreact to
information with much strength but with low statistical weight while they underreact to
information with little strength but high statistical weight. Additionally, Daniel, Hirschleifer
and Subrahmanyam (1997) argue that investors overreact to private information while
underreact to public information and that investors’ confidence changes in a biased fashion as
a function of their decision outcomes.

In terms of earlier momentum effect in Sweden, Rouwenhorst (1998) showed that the
Swedish momentum factor from 1980 to 1995 was 0.0016 with a t-statistic of 0.36 when
testing its difference from 0. This indicates a weak momentum effect.
3. Data

In this section, we describe the all data used in this paper. This section proceeds as follows:
Section 3.1 gives a description of the mutual fund data and the source of the data. Section 3.2
presents the prerequisites of a Swedish mutual fund in this paper. Section 3.3 presents the
adjustments made to the data before the regressions. Section 3.4 explains our proxies for the
market return and the risk-free rate. Section 3.5 describes the data used to create the factor
portfolios and section 3.6 presents the key adjustments made to the data used to create the
factor portfolios.

3.1 Data Description of Swedish Mutual Funds
Our mutual fund database consists of monthly returns from diversified Swedish equity funds,
covering the period January 1997 to December 2008. We believe that the mutual funds
included in the sample give an accurate representation of the mutual funds that primarily
invest in the Swedish equity market. The data was obtained from  Wassum Investment
Consultings’  database  Winfond.  Wassum  is  one  of  the  largest  independent  investment
consulting firms in Sweden, advising primarily institutional investors.

The data is subject to some survivorship bias since the majority of the mutual funds we
exported from  Winfond  are active and only a few inactive mutual funds are included. Thus,
since the majority of the mutual funds are survivors, it is possible that our results are biased
upwards, since non-survivors are more likely to perform worse than the survivors (Brown,
Goetzmann and Ibbotson, 1992). We have tried to find more data of dead funds, but due to
lack of data, we have not made any additional corrections. Thus, if our data is inaccurate, it is
most likely that the data is slightly overstated. Table 1 in appendix reports summary statistics
on our mutual fund data. Our sample includes a total of 75 diversified open-end equity funds
with 11619 fund months.

3.2 Definition of Swedish Mutual Fund
In this paper, a mutual fund is defined as an actively managed Swedish mutual fund if it meets
the following criteria:

    1.   The fund invests primarily in the Swedish equity market.
    2.   The fund invests in Swedish equity, not Swedish mutual funds.
    3.   The fund intends to outperform, not replicate, a benchmark.

Thus, our sample automatically omits sector funds, funds with substantial amounts of foreign
equity, index funds and funds-of-funds.

3.3 Fund Data Adjustments
The raw data from  Wassum  consists of monthly returns net of fees adjusted for dividends. To
fit the data for our purposes, we made some necessary adjustments and corrections to the data.
To calculate the excess returns net of fees, we subtracted the risk-free rate value from each
monthly return value. To back out the excess returns gross of fees for every fund, we found
the management fees for each fund in the fund prospectuses. We did not adjust the data for
load fees since load fees are generally deducted by reducing the number of fund shares. Since
the return is based on the change in Net Asset Value of each fund share and not the amount of
                                                                     d
fund shares, we chose not to make any adjustments for load fees . When reverse calculating
the fund returns before fees, we add back one-twelfth of the annual management fee each
year. Thus, the reverse calculation equation is:

                          R a  = ( 1 + Ru,it  ) / ( 1 – ( 1 / 12 ) * F i ) – Rf ,t  – 1

Here, R a  is the calculated return before fees, Ru,it  is the raw return for a specific fund at a
given month, F i  is the annual management fee for a mutual fund and R f,t  is the risk-free rate in
a specific month. One important point to remember is that our returns gross of fees are
calculated and not observed. Thus, the returns net of fees are more reliable as dependent
variables in regression analysis and we will interpret the results from the before fee-settings
more cautiously.

3.4 Market proxy and risk  free rate proxy
The market proxy and risk-free rate proxy were also supported by  Wassum. We chose
SIXPRX as the market proxy since this index follows the UCITS-rules that apply to most
Swedish mutual funds. The key rules in SIXPRX are that one firm’s market capitalization
cannot exceed 10% of the total market capitalization and that individual firms with more than
5% of total market capitalization combined cannot exceed 40% of total market capitalization.
These rules reflect the return a mutual fund is allowed to earn and thus we believe this is the
most appropriate index to be used. Additionally, SIXPRX adjusts for dividends on the date
                                                                                                                       e
after the actual dividend payments, further increasing the suitability of this index . The
STIBOR 30-day interbank rate is our risk-free rate proxy. STIBOR 30-day interbank rate is a
rate that is calculated as the average of several interest rates that banks offer each other when
                                     f
borrowing and lending in SEK  . This interest rate is compounded on a monthly basis.

3.5 Data Description of FF  Factors and Momentum  Factor
Our equity database (used to create the independent variables SMB, HML and PR1YR in the
Carhart  4-factor  model)  is  Datastream  by  Thomson  Financial.  There,  we  export  four
datatypes:  Market Price  (Mnemonic: WP),  Dividend Per Share  (Mnemonic: DPS),  Market To
Book Value  (Mnemonic: MTBV) and  Market Value (Capital)  (Mnemonic: MV). We sorted
the size of firms according to  Market Value (Capital)  and the book-to-market according to the
inverse of  Market To Book Value. The momentum factor was sorted according to the best
return the previous 11 months lag one month using  Market Price  with  Dividends Per Share
added back. In total, we have 437 stocks that create the Swedish factor portfolios and on
average, 268 stocks make up each factor portfolio in a given year.

The data is subject to survivorship bias since only stocks that were listed as “alive” in
                            th
Datastream on April 19  2009 were included. The reason to this is that we were unable to
export delisted stock prices. The implication of this is that the estimates of our three
independent variables SMB, HML and PR1YR are not necessarily the true independent FF-

d
 We thank Magnus Rosén from Wassum investment Consulting for this advice.
e
 See – http://www.six.se/templates/pages/ProductPage____234.aspx – for more details.
f
 See – http://www.riksbank.se/templates/stat.aspx?id=16738 – for more details.
and momentum-variables. If there is any substantial error, we believe that our momentum
factor is understated in general over time. In any year, a certain number of firms enter
bankruptcy and we believe that the factor portfolios will be affected in the following ways.
Conditional on bankruptcy, the stock price of a particular firm has most likely dropped in the
months before the bankruptcy. If we would take these firms into account, the spread between
the best performing 30% stocks the previous 11 months lag one month and the worst
performing 30% stocks the previous 11 months lag 1 month should be even larger since there
would be more firms with extremely negative returns in the worst portfolio. In such a
situation, our estimates of the momentum factor portfolio returns are most likely understated.
For the SMB-factor portfolio returns, we believe that these are overstated. If we assume that
the probability that a small firm goes into bankruptcy is higher than that of a large firm, the
most extreme negative returns should be found in the 50% smallest firms. In such a situation,
the spread in returns should decrease between the portfolio of the 50% smallest firms and the
portfolio of the 50% largest. For the HML-factor, this one is likely understated as well, if we
assume that growth firms are more likely to enter bankruptcy than value firms since growth
firms in general are small while value firms are large. Moreover, growth firms tend to have
lower book-to-market ratio than value firms since investors pay for prospective earnings
                                                 g
growth according to the Gordon growth model  . In this case, firms that enter bankruptcy are
more likely to be in the 30% of firms with the lowest book-to-market ratio and since these
firms tend to experience extreme negative returns prior to the bankruptcy, the spread should
increase if we would include firms that are delisted due to bankruptcy. Therefore, HML is
understated. For firms that were delisted to other reasons than bankruptcy, any reasoning of
this topic is beyond the scope of this paper.

3.6 Equity Data Adjustments
The following adjustments were made to the equity data used to create the Carhart 4-factor
model factors. Firstly, we only kept all observations that had a price and a corresponding
market capitalization at a given time. This is because the prices are necessary for calculating
returns while the market capitalizations are needed to value-weight the stock returns in each
factor portfolio. If an observation (one stock at one time) lacked the  Market To Book Value,
this particular observation would be omitted from the HML-factor portfolio. Thus, the number
of observations used to create the different factor portfolios is unbalanced over the study
period, since the HML-factor portfolio generally has fewer observations in the cross-section.
Secondly, some firms have both A- and B-types of stocks listed. In that case, we value-
weighted those stocks and their corresponding returns, dividends, market value and book-to-
market values into one stock. In terms of dividend-adjustment, one twelfth of the annual
dividend was added back to the price of each stock. Furthermore, we assumed occasional
missing values in terms of price or market cap to be the same as the previous month. This is
because we would otherwise lose two return observations for every missing price value.
Additionally, stocks that displayed very long series with the same price observation were
removed since no return stocks would bias the Carhart 4-factor model factors. Altogether,
these adjustments allow us to create more reliable and continuous factor portfolios.

g
 Price = Dividendt+1 /(Cost of Capital – Growth rate)
4. Methodology

In this section, we explain the econometric and statistical methods used to answer our
research questions. In section 4.1, we explain the process to create the factor portfolios. We
choose to do this in this section to facilitate the understanding of our econometric models. In
section 4.2, we specify the econometric models and the fund portfolio method used to study
mutual fund performance and persistence. In 4.3 we explain how we study the effect of fund
characteristics on returns and in 4.4 we explain how we study the effect of initial fund
performance versus later returns.

4.1 SMB, HML and PR1YR Factor Portfolios
SMB, HML and momentum factor portfolios adjust for the three types of market anomalies
presented in section 2.4. The SMB factor portfolio adjusts for the size anomaly, the HML
factor portfolio adjust for the book-to-market anomaly and the PR1YR factor portfolio adjusts
for the momentum anomaly.

SMBt  is a Fama-French factor that represents the return one would receive if one would buy a
value-weighted portfolio made up by the 50% smallest stocks by market capitalization on the
Swedish equity market while short selling a value weighted portfolio made up by the 50%
largest stocks by market capitalization on the Swedish equity market. HMLt  is a Fama-French
factor that represents the return one would receive if one would buy a value-weighted
portfolio made up by the 30% stocks with the lowest market to book values on the Swedish
equity market at a specific time while short selling a value-weighted portfolio made up by the
30% stocks with the highest market to book values on the Swedish equity market at a specific
time. PR1YR t  represents the return one would receive if one would buy a value-weighted
portfolio made up by the 30% best performing stocks the previous 11 months on the Swedish
equity market while short selling a value weighted portfolio made up by the 30% worst
performing stocks the previous 11 months on the Swedish equity market.

4.2 Mutual Fund Performance and Persistence
We employ three models of performance measurement: the Capital Asset Pricing Model
(CAPM) described in Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965), the Fama-French (1995) 3-factor
model and the Carhart (1995) 4-factor model. The next two paragraphs discuss these three
models briefly.

The three models are defined as:

  (1)  ERit  =  αiT  +  βiTVWRmRft  + eit                                t = 1998-01, ···, 2008-12, T
  (2)  ERit  =  αiT  +  βiTVWRmRft  + siTSMB t  + hiTHMLt  + eit              t = 1998-01, ···, 2008-12, T
  (3)  ERit  =  αiT  +  βiTVWRmRft  + siTSMB t  + hiTHMLt  + piTPR1YR t  + eit   t = 1998-01, ···, 2008-12, T

Here, (1) is the CAPM model, (2) is the Fama-French 3-factor model and (3) is the Carhart 4-
factor model. For (1): ERit  is the excess return of a specific mutual fund at a specific time and
αiT  is the risk-adjusted return of a specific mutual fund over the study period.  αiT  is also
known as Jensen’s alpha. VWRmRf t  is the excess return of the Swedish stock market at a
specific time and we use SIXPRX as the proxy for the Swedish stock market and the STIBOR
30-days interbank rate as the proxy for the risk-free rate.  βiT  is the market risk, and eit  is an
error term for each monthly return observation for each fund. For (2) and (3): ERit ,  αiT  and eit
are the same as in (1). The description of the factor portfolios  VWRmRf t ,  SMBt , and  PR1YR t
are explained in section  4.1.  βiT, s iT, hiT  and piT are coefficients to the four factor portfolios.

We  run  regressions of  mutual  fund  portfolios  according  to  the  methodology  used  by
Hendricks, Patel and Zeckhauser (1993). Every year, we sort individual funds into fund
portfolios based on the performance of individual funds the previous year. Portfolio 1
contains the worst performing funds, portfolio 2 the middle performers and portfolio 3 the
best performers. When interpreting the fund persistence, the importance is whether alpha
values  are  statistically  different  from  0  and  when  interpreting  fund  performance,  the
magnitude of the alphas is the key feature. One note of explanation in the interpretation of
regressed coefficients is that a p-value below 0.01 will be considered to be strong evidence, a
p-value below 0.05 will be considered to be evidence and a p-value below 0.10 will be
considered weak evidence. Moreover, we always correct for robustness when running the
regressions in STATA.

4.3 Mutual Fund Characteristics
When studying the partial effect of fund characteristics on excess return, we intend to
regressions of sub-samples of our data using model (3). When studying whether small cap
funds earn different risk-adjusted returns than growth and income funds, we run separate
regressions of two sub-samples of the data. One subsample contains the excess returns of 14
small cap funds and the other contains the excess returns of 61 growth and income funds.
When studying whether mutual funds offered by banks earn different returns than other fund
companies, we run separate regressions of two sub-samples as well. One sub-sample contains
the excess returns of 22 funds offered by one of the four large commercial banks in Sweden
(Nordea, Handelsbanken, Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken and Swedbank) and the other sub-
sample contains the excess returns of 53 funds offered by other fund companies. These
regressions cover the period 1998 to 2008. All four regressions are corrected for robustness
and  the  datasets  in  both  settings  are  fairly  balanced  in  terms  of  average  number  of
observations per fund in each sub-sample.

4.4 Initial fund performance
When studying initial fund performance, we again intend to use model (3) while forming two
sub-samples of our data. We run a regression of the first 24 monthly excess returns for each
mutual fund in a cross sectional setting and then we run a separate regression of all the later
excess returns observations. Both regressions are corrected for robustness and there are a total
of 1800 fund excess return observations in the first sub-sample of data and 9819 fund excess
return observations in the second sub-sample of data.

5. Results
In this section, we present the main findings of our research. Section 5.1 evaluates mutual
fund performance and persistence in Swedish mutual funds. Section 5.2 evaluates how mutual
fund characteristics affect returns. Section 5.3 presents and discusses the results on initial fund
performance in the Swedish mutual fund market and section 5.4 discusses the three factor
portfolios: size, book-to-market and momentum. All tables can be found in the appendix.

5.1 Mutual Fund Performance and Persistence
Today, the general consensus within financial research is that there is some evidence of short-
term persistence while a mutual fund on average is unable to earn positive alphas. Few studies
have deviated from this general opinion.

To begin with, we interpret the results from tables 4 and 5 in appendix to examine whether
Swedish mutual funds exhibit performance and persistence in a CAPM setting. In table 4 –
CAPM net of fees – the portfolio that performed the worst the previous year exhibits the
highest monthly excess return with the middle portfolio exhibiting the lowest monthly excess
return. The alpha-values are all positive but lack statistical significance at the cutoff p-value
of 0.05. The market excess return coefficients are close to 1.00 for all three portfolios with
high statistical significance, implying that all three portfolios follow the market closely. In
terms of R-squared values, CAPM as a model has a high explanatory power since it explains
more than 91% of the variation for all three mutual fund portfolios. The spread between the
best and the worst performing portfolio is surprisingly negative since the spreads in Carhart
(1997) and Otten and Bams (2002) are all positive. In table 5 – CAPM gross of fees – the
estimated alpha values are higher, which is expected, but they all lack statistical significance
with the exception of portfolio 2. For some reason, there is weak evidence that the alpha value
of portfolio 2 is positive and different from 0 (Why this is the case will be discussed later on
in the paper). The market excess return is still the dominant independent variable in terms of
both practical and statistical significance and the R-squared values in table 6 are almost
unchanged from those of table 5.

In tables 6 and 7, we find the results from the Fama-French regressions on Swedish mutual
fund returns. In table 6 – Fama-French net of fees – we see that the estimated alphas for all
three portfolios are all positive, but that no alpha value is statistically different from 0. As in
the CAPM-setting, the market excess return is the dominant independent variable both in
terms of practical and statistical significance. Again, the market excess return coefficient is
close to 1.00 for all three portfolios, indicating that all mutual fund portfolios follow the
Swedish equity market closely. The SMB-coefficients are all positive for all three mutual
fund portfolios, but they all lack statistical significance, indicating that there is no risk-
premium for small stocks in the Swedish equity market as there is in the U.S equity market.
The HML-coefficient is high in terms of absolute value for both portfolio 1 and 3. All HML-
coefficients also lack statistical significance and thus we cannot say that there is a clear
relationship between fund portfolio excess returns and the HML-factor. The spread in alpha is
still negative as it was in the CAPM setting. In table 7 – Fama-French gross of fees – the most
interesting observation is that the alpha-value for portfolio 2 in this setting has statistical
significance, as it had in CAPM, which deviates from the result in the Fama-French setting
net of fees. Otherwise, there are no other substantial differences between the Fama-French
regressions gross of fees and net of fees. The R-squared values increase only marginally
because the market excess return is the dominant independent variable, as it was in the
CAPM-setting, and because the SMB and HML-factors do not increase explanatory power.
In tables 8 and 9, we examine the regression results from the Carhart 4-factor model. From
table 8 – in the Carhart 4-factor setting net of fees – the alpha values for all fund portfolios are
statistically not different from 0 due to high p-values. The market excess return is still the
dominant independent variable in terms of statistical and practical significance while all SMB
and  HML  coefficients  for  all  three  are  positive  but  lack  statistical  significance.  The
momentum coefficient for portfolio 2 is surprisingly statistically significant and negative
while the momentum coefficients for portfolios 1 and 3 are statistically insignificant and
positive. The R-squared values for all three fund portfolios are almost the same as the ones in
the Fama-French setting, indicating that both the Fama-French and Carhart settings add
extremely little explanatory power in relation to CAPM. In table 9 – Carhart 4-factor model
gross of fees – the only difference worth noting is that the alpha value for portfolio 2 has
statistical significance as in the previous model specifications.

Overall, there is no clear evidence of performance persistence in the six settings we have
employed. The alphas in general lack statistical significance on the 5%-rejection level even
though they in general are positive in an after fee setting. Furthermore, we find no evidence
that mutual funds outperform the market benchmark net of fees since our alphas are not
statistically different from 0. However, portfolio 2 (the one with the middle performers)
displays low p-values in all three settings before fees. We have not found anything like this in
the previous literature that we have studied but either there is some model specification
problem or there might be an anomaly in the Swedish fund market. If there actually is an
anomaly,  this  would  imply  that  investors  earn  excess  return  by  investing  in  average
performers, which contradicts previous studies that report “hot hands”-effects and reverse
momentum effects in mutual fund returns. Though, the returns before fees are estimated and
not observed, implying that the regression results before fees are less reliable than the
regression results after fees. We are therefore cautious when drawing conclusions with the
results from gross of fee settings. The coefficients of the market excess return factors in all
settings display high statistical significance and coefficients close to 1.00 (see table 3 for
cross-correlations between mutual fund portfolios and the market proxy). This suggests that
Swedish mutual funds follow the market index very closely on average. We also see that the
Fama-French 3-factor model and the Carhart 4-factor model add little value in terms of
explanatory power and factor-coefficients compared to CAPM.

5.2 Mutual Fund Characteristics and Returns
In tables 12 and 13, we study whether small cap funds perform better than the other funds in
our data sample. In the data sample, 14 out of 75 mutual funds are small cap funds. All the
other funds could be defined as growth and income type funds since they invest in the total
cross-section of stocks in the Swedish equity market. We employ the Carhart 4-factor model
to derive the alphas. In the after fee setting, small cap funds report positive alphas while the
other funds report negative alphas. However, the p-values are too low for the alphas to be
considered as evidence. At most, this might be an indication. Moreover, in the before fee
setting, the alphas of other funds have statistical significance. This result is surprising and
might indicate that the fees of other funds are high enough to eliminate any existing positive
alpha. Interestingly, the R-squared value for other funds is 0.99, indicating that the regressors
in the Carhart 4-factor model explain almost all variation in returns. For small cap funds, R-
squared is substantially lower, indicating that the Carhart 4-factor model might not be the best
one to explain small cap returns in the Swedish fund market. These results suggest that we see
no differences between the two groups and in order to investigate this issue further, different
methods could be appropriate.

In tables 14 and 15, we study whether the mutual funds offered by the four largest banks in
Sweden   (Nordea,   Handelsbanken,   Skandinaviska   Enskilda   Banken   and   Swedbank)
outperform those funds offered by other investment firms. In the data sample, 22 out of 75
mutual funds are offered by one of the large banks. As before, the Carhart 4-factor model is
used to derive the alphas. In the after fee setting, mutual funds offered by the large banks earn
a slightly negative return while the mutual funds offered by other investment firms earn a
positive return. Nevertheless, both alpha estimates have little statistical significance and thus,
there is no evidence that the alphas are different from 0. Furthermore, in the before fee setting,
the alphas are obviously higher and the statistical significance increases. There is weak
evidence that the positive alphas of other investment firms are different from 0. If the alphas
are different from 0, the mutual funds of other investment firms may offer excess returns of
approximately 2.3% annually. Another observation is that the R-squared values in both
settings are high. Some reasons why one of the sub-samples would earn higher alphas could
be that there are economies of scale-effects in larger banks that would enable lower fees. This
would in turn lead to higher alphas. Another possible reason is that smaller fund companies
have incentives to work harder to attract clients and this can only be done by consistently
outperforming the market. Larger banks on the other hand have more ways to earn their
income than investment management, and mutual funds offered by larger banks might be
another way to convince banking customers to commit funds to the bank. A more detailed
study on this topic is beyond the scope of this paper since it would likely require qualitative
information as well.

5.3 Initial fund performance
Tables 10 and 11 reports initial fund performance and later performance of Swedish mutual
funds. In both settings, the alphas are positive and the statistical significance is high for fund
returns the first two years of the funds existence. As the funds become more seasoned, the
alphas decrease and the statistical significance is lower. Thus there is evidence that new funds
perform better early on. The magnitudes of the excess returns are approximately 4.8%
annually  after fees and 6.1% annually  before fees, indicating that there is substantial
outperformance initially. This result is consistent with the presence of superior initial fund
performance found in the studies of Arteaga, Ciccotello and Grant (1998) and Wisen and
Chang (2002). Plausible explanations to these results are most likely linked to the incubation
and selective attention theories. According to the incubation theory, mutual funds are not
offered to the public if there is no evidence of superior returns since fund companies have no
incentives to advertise inferior products. Therefore, the funds are closed to the public and kept
relatively  small  initially  to  build  a  track  record.  When  the  track  record  of  superior
performance is built, the funds are offered to the public. Later, the funds that are subject to
incubation initially may find it difficult to reproduce superior performance since the initial
superior performance was created in rare circumstances. Furthermore, when funds are small
and not fully capitalized, the percentage of assets allocated to special situations is higher than
it would be under “normal” circumstances. This allows mutual funds to inflate the returns by
taking advantage of rare opportunities, such as preferential IPOs. As the mutual funds grow in
size and become more seasoned, a smaller of fraction is allocated to these special situations.

5.4 Swedish SMB, HML and Momentum Factor
From Table 2, we start by analyzing the Swedish Fama-French coefficients. We see that both
the market excess return and the momentum factor are positive the past 11 years. The size
factor and the book-to-market factors are negative during this period. Considering the low t-
statistics values, it is unlikely that the size and book-to-market factor portfolios are different
from 0. Since we believe that the average return of the estimated SMB factor portfolio is
overstated, adding delisted stocks would decrease the average return. Thus, there would
probably be stronger evidence that the SMB-factor portfolio has an average return that is
negative  and  statistically  different  from  0.  Since  we  believe  that  the  HML-factor  is
understated, adding delisted stocks would likely bring the average HML-factor portfolio
return close to 0. Thus, the HML-factor would probably be statistically not different from 0.

Regarding momentum, the results show that the momentum factor from 1997 to 2008 is much
higher in terms of average absolute value with a higher level of significance than the two
other factor portfolios. The t-value of 1.57 indicates that there is weak evidence that the
average momentum effect is different from 0 and this indicates that momentum strategies in
the Swedish equity market between 1998 and 2008 might have been successful. Moreover, in
terms of possible bias, we believe that our estimated momentum factor is understated since we
excluded delisted stocks. If they were included, the spread in momentum would be even
larger, further strengthening the evidence that the momentum factor is different from 0. With
this in mind, possible explanations to this Swedish momentum effect are that investors
overreact to certain stocks on the market or that overconfidence causes investors to pay too
high a price for certain stocks while too low a price for certain stocks. This would cause an
additional return disparity among stocks, creating the momentum factor. However, a more
detailed analysis is beyond the scope of this paper and this could be an excellent topic for
future research.

Overall, our estimated Swedish factor portfolios are inconsistent with the ones in Carhart
(1997) but fairly consistent with the ones estimated by Otten and Bams (2002), in especially
UK and France. The standard deviations of the estimated Swedish factor portfolios are higher
than those estimated in the other studies, indicating that the return observations for all three
factor portfolios are further away from the mean values than their international counterparts.

6. Conclusion

In this study, we have examined the risk-adjusted performance and persistence of actively
managed Swedish mutual funds, two types of fund characteristics and their effect on excess
returns and initial fund performance versus later performance. To our knowledge, no other
study has employed the Fama-French 3 factor model and the Carhart 4-factor model to study
mutual fund alphas on Swedish mutual funds. By building the factor portfolios needed as
independent variables in the econometric models, we have been able to risk-adjust the
performance of mutual funds with three of the most common risk-factors.

In the area of mutual fund performance and persistence, we do not find evidence that risk-
adjusted alphas on average are statistically different from 0 in a net of fee setting among
Swedish mutual funds. This result also applies for the mutual fund portfolios in the gross of
fee setting, with the exception being the middle performing portfolio in all three asset pricing
models. Thus, this would suggest that investors do not receive any excess return on average in
active management investments and that Swedish mutual funds generally do not outperform
index. Since neither alpha spread estimate is statistically significant, we see no evidence of
persistence as well. One key reason to this result is the high correlation between the returns of
Swedish mutual funds and the returns of the Swedish equity market. If mutual funds in
general follow the benchmark closely, management fees would handicap the mutual funds
ability to outperform the market after fees. One plausible strategy according to these results
would thus be to invest in a low-expense index fund.

In the area of fund characteristics, we find no evidence that small cap funds perform better
than value funds. If the size anomaly would hold, we would expect small cap funds to earn
higher returns due to the higher risk premium for small cap stocks. The results of this study
suggest that there might not be any extra risk premium for small cap stocks in Sweden or that
small cap funds are unable to capitalize on the opportunities on the equity market. We also
find no evidence that mutual funds offered by the four large banks earn different alphas than
funds offered by other fund companies. From an investor perspective, there is no need to
focus more on one of these four fund groups and from a fund managers’ perspective, it is hard
to differentiate the fund group to which the managers’ fund belongs to.

In the area of initial fund performance, we see strong evidence of positive alphas in the first
two years. Later, these funds do not deliver positive alphas with statistical significance. For
investors, this suggests that one should be cautious when evaluating the performance of
mutual funds based on early results. The possibility for the fund companies to incubate mutual
funds and allow them to take advantage of special opportunities will lead to an upward bias in
performance early. What is more, it might be best to exclude the performance in the first two
years altogether when evaluating mutual funds.

In the area of factor portfolios, the t-statistics of the size and book-to-market factors suggest
that these factors are unlikely to be different from 0. Thus, there seems to be no evidence that
there should have been a small stock risk-premium or a value-stock risk premium for Swedish
stocks from 1998 to 2008. For the momentum factor, there are indications that there has been
a momentum effect in the Swedish stock market during the past 11 years. This result suggests
that there might be a “momentum risk premium” in Swedish stocks.
7. Further Research
Our results show inconsistent evidence of momentum effect in the mutual fund portfolios. As
mentioned before, portfolio 2 displays evidence of momentum. Since we excluded delisted
stocks in the momentum factor, it would be interesting to recreate the momentum factor and
see whether the estimated momentum effect for portfolio 2 is a miscalculation or an anomaly.
If an anomaly exists, it would be different from the “hot hands”-effect and reverse momentum
effects observed in previous studies.

Aside from the quantitative aspects of mutual funds, it would be interesting to study more
qualitative characteristics. For instance, the performance of a mutual fund is generally
attributed to the skills of the fund manager and from an investor’s and employer’s perspective,
a study of the performance of individual fund managers would be highly attractive.
REFERENCES

Arshanapalli, Bala, Daniel T. Coggin and William Nelson, 2002, "The January effect and the global
value-growth premium",  Journal of Investing  11.

Arteaga, K., C. Ciccotello, and C. Grant, 1998, "New Equity Funds: Marketing and Performance."
Financial Analysts Journal, pp. 43-49.

Bergström, Johan, and Victor Sundén, 2008, "Mutual fund attributes and their relationship to risk-
adjusted return: A study on the performance and characteristics on the Swedish fund market", SSE
Master Thesis in Finance.

Banz 1981, Rolf W., 1981, "The relationship between return and market value of common stocks",
Journal of Financial Economics  9, pp. 3-18.

Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Schleifer and Robert Vishny, 1998, "A model of investor sentiment",
Journal of Financial Economics  49, pp. 307-343.

Brown, Stephen J., and William N. Goetzmann, 1995, "Performance Persistence",  Journal of Finance
50, pp. 679-698.

Brown, Stephen J.,  William N.  Goetzmann,  Roger  G.  Ibbotson, and Stephen  A.  Ross, 1992,
"Survivorship Bias in Performance Studies",  Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 5, No. 4, pp. 553-580.

Carhart, Mark M., 1997, "On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance",  Journal of Finance Vol. LII,
pp. 57-82.

Dahlquist, M., Engström, S., Söderlind, P., 2000, "Performance and Characteristics of Swedish Mutual
Funds",  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol 35, No 3, pp. 409-423.

Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1997, "A theory of overconfidence,
self-attribution and security market under- and over-reactions", NRP Report.

Engström, Stefan, 2004, "Does Active Portfolio Management Create Value?  An Evaluation of Fund
Managers' Decisions", SSE/EFI Working Paper Series in Economics and Finance No 553.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, "The cross-section of expected stock returns",
Journal of Finance  47, pp. 427-465.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1995, "Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and
returns",  Journal of Finance  50, pp. 131-155.

Ferson, Wayne E., and Rudi Schadt, 1996, "Measuring fund strategy and performance in changing
economic conditions". Journal of Finance 51, pp. 425-461.

Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1992, "The Persistence of Mutual Fund Performance",  Journal
of Finance  47, pp. 1977-1984.

Gruber, Martin J., 1996, "Another puzzle: the growth in actively managed mutual funds",  Journal of
Finance  51, pp. 783-807.

Hendricks, Darryll, Jayendu Patel and Richard Zeckhauser, 1993, "Hot hands in mutual funds: Short-
run persistence of relative performance, 1974-1988", Journal of Finance 48, pp. 93-130.
Holmes, Millicent, 2007, "Improved study funds index management usually outperforms active
management",  Journal of Financial Planning, pp. 48-58.

Jegadeesh, Marasimham, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, "Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
Implications for stock market efficiency",  Journal of Finance  48, pp. 65-91.

Jensen, Michael M., 1969, "Risk, the pricing of capital assets, and the evaluation of investment
portfolios",  Journal of Business  42, pp. 167-247.

Lindeen, Eric, and Jani Gros, 2009, "A Study of Size-Driven Effects on Performance in Swedish
Equity", Mutual Funds, SSE Master Thesis in Finance.

Lintner, John, 1965, "The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in stock
portfolios and capital budgets",  Review of Economics and Statistics 47, pp. 13-37.

Malkiel, Burton G., 1995, "Returns from investing in equity mutual funds 1971 to 1991",  Journal of
Finance  50, pp. 549-572.

Otten, Roger, and Dennis Bams, 2002, "European mutual fund performance",  European Financial
Management 8, pp. 75-101.

Rosenberg,  Barr,  Kenneth  Reid  and  Ronald  Lanstein,  1985,  "Persuasive  evidence  of  market
inefficiency",  Journal of Portfolio Management  11, pp. 9-17.

Rouwenhorst, Geert K., 1998, "International momentum strategies",  Journal of Finance  53, pp. 267-
284.

Sharpe, Willam F., 1964, "Capital Asset Prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of
risk",  Journal of Finance  19, pp. 425-442.

Sharpe, William F., 1966, "Mutual Fund Performance", Journal of Business  39, pp. 119-138.

Treynor, Jack L., and Kay K. Mazuy, 1966, "Can Mutual Funds Outguess the Market? ",  Harvard
Business Review July-August 1966, pp. 131-136.

Wermers, Russ, 2000, "Mutual fund performance: an empirical decomposition into stock-picking
talent, style transaction costs and expenses",  Journal of Finance  60, pp. 1655-1695.

Wisen, Craig, and Kevin Chiang, 2006, "Explaining the Initial Returns of Mutual Funds",  Journal of
Investing  Summer 2006, pp. 53-67.

Zweig, Jason, 1996, "When to Take a Wild Ride."  Money, July 1996, pp. 96-99.
     APPENDIX

                                       Table 1
                       Summary Statistics of Mutual Funds
           Growth & Income funds invest across the cross-section of firms on the Swedish equity market while
           Small Cap funds only invest in firms with small or/and medium-small market capitalizations. Listed
           below is the total number of funds in each category, the average number of firms in one category
           during the period 1998-2008, mean monthly returns net of management fees, mean monthly standard
           deviations of return net of fees, average management fee in each category, the number of funds in each
            category with load fees and the average age of the funds in each category.

               Total     Avg. number   Mean returns             Avg. M   Funds with load
   Group      number   over time       net of fees     Std.Dev   Fee      fees               Avg. Age
    Growth &
     Income       61         50.42        0.002529     0.061729   1.373%          5            9.41
    Small cap      14         13.62        0.002925     0.071071    1.471%          1            9.99

                                       Table 2
                                Factor Descriptives
          VWRmRf is the market excess return constructed by the SIXPRX index return minus the STIBOR 30-
           day rate on a monthly basis. SMB and HML are the Fama-French factors mimicking portfolios for size

             Monthly
   Factor      Excess     Standard    t-stat for                         Cross-Correlations
 Portfolio     Return    Deviation    Mean = 0    VWRmRf     SMB           HML          PR1YR
VWRMRF       0.35        6.04        0.41       1.0000
SMB           -0.25        5.30        0.36       0.2007      1.0000
HML           -0.23        7.08        0.24       -0.0734      0.0647          1.0000
PR1YR         1.22        10.98        1.57       0.1891      0.0361          -0.3749          1.0000
          and book-to-market. PR1YR is the momentum factor created by the returns from the previous 11
          months.

                                       Table 3
                       Mutual Fund Portfolio Correlations
                                                                                   st
                    Mutual funds are sorted into portfolios on the 1  day each year based on their
                    performances during the previous year. Portfolio 1 includes the worst performers
                     and portfolio 3 the best performers each previous year. Each portfolio includes 1/3
                   of all funds and the returns of the mutual funds are equally weighted in each
                   mutual fund portfolio. VWRmRf is the market excess return constructed by the
                    SIXPRX index return minus the STIBOR 30-day rate on a monthly basis.
                          Correlation    VWRmRf      Portfolio 1    Portfolio 2    Portfolio 3
                       VWRmRf      1.0000
                          Portfolio 1       0.9679       1.0000
                          Portfolio 2       0.9927       0.0973      1.0000
                         Portfolio 3       0.9576       0.9487      0.9603      1.0000
                              Table 4
                       CAPM (Net of Fees)
       Monthly mutual fund returns are regressed to the monthly independent variables in a
                                                                                             st
       CAPM-setting after fees. Mutual funds are sorted into portfolios on the 1  day in each
       year based on their performances the previous year. Portfolio 1 includes the worst
       performers and portfolio 3 the best performers. Each portfolio contains 1/3 of the
       funds and the returns are equally weighted for each mutual fund within a portfolio.
       VWRmRf is the market excess return constructed by the SIXPRX index return minus
       the STIBOR 30-day rate.
                Monthly                            CAPM
                   Excess      Standard
    Portfolio        Return      Deviation       α-Alpha     VWRmRf          R²
       1           0.0028599      0.0643631      0.0006257      1.0203670     0.9368
1-P-value                                       0.649          0.000
       2           0.0022341      0.0624945      0.0000091      1.0161380     0.9854
2-P-value                                       0.989          0.000
       3           0.0025767      0.0634897      0.0003962      0.9958363      0.917
3: P-value                                       0.803          0.000
   3-1 spread       -0.0002833      0.0204863      -0.0002295     -0.0245307     0.0053
3-1-P-value                                     0.896          0.472

                              Table 5
                      CAPM (Gross of Fees)
       Monthly mutual fund returns are regressed to the monthly independent variables in a
                                                                                                  st
       CAPM-setting before fees. Mutual funds are sorted into portfolios on the 1  day in
       each year based on their performances the previous year. Portfolio 1 includes the
       worst performers and portfolio 3 the best performers. Each portfolio contains 1/3 of
       the funds and the returns are equally weighted for each mutual fund within a
       portfolio. VWRmRf is the market excess return constructed by the SIXPRX index
       return minus the STIBOR 30-day rate.
                  Monthly                         CAPM
                     Excess     Standard
       Portfolio        Return     Deviation     α-Alpha      VWRmRf       R²
          1           0.004006     0.0643781     0.0017720     1.0202420     0.9361
   1-P-value                                   0.201         0.000
          2           0.003496     0.0623892     0.0012741     1.0145140     0.9856
   2-P-value                                   0.052         0.000
          3           0.003703     0.0638236     0.0015106     1.0012540     0.9173
   3: P-value                                   0.343         0.000
       3-1 spread       -0.000303     0.0204153    -0.0002614     -0.018988     0.0052
   3-1-P-value                                  0.882         0.579
                                     Table 6
                  Fama  French 3  factor model (Net of Fees)
         Monthly mutual fund returns are regressed to the monthly independent variables in a Fama-French
                                                                                         st
         setting after fees. Mutual funds are sorted into portfolios on the 1  day in each year based on their
         performances the previous year. Portfolio 1 includes the worst performers and portfolio 3 the best
         performers. Each portfolio contains 1/3 of the funds and the returns are equally weighted for each
         mutual fund within a portfolio. VWRmRf is the market excess return constructed by the SIXPRX
         index return minus the STIBOR 30-day rate. SMB and HML are our self-constructed Swedish Fama-
         French factors, mimicking portfolios for size and book-to-market.
                 Monthly                              Fama-French 3-Factor Model
                 Excess     Standard
   Portfolio       Return     Deviation      α-Alpha     VWRmRf       SMB        HML        R²
      1          0.0028599     0.0643631     0.0006774     1.0137390    0.0164168   -0.0433731    0.9392
1-P-value                                   0.621         0.000        0.707        0.170
      2          0.0022341     0.0624945     0.0000277     1.0173220   -0.0089765    0.0042980    0.9855
2-P-value                                   0.966         0.000        0.466        0.709
      3          0.0025767     0.0634897     0.0004753     0.9932282   -0.0062939   -0.0425010    0.9194
3: P-value                                  0.765         0.000        0.827        0.336
  3-1 spread     -0.0002833     0.0204863     -0.0002022    -0.0205106   -0.0227107    0.0008721    0.0086
3-1-P-value                                  0.91         0.509        0.578        0.984

                                     Table 7
                          Fama  French (Gross of Fees)
         Monthly mutual fund returns are regressed to the monthly independent variables in a Fama-French
                                                                                         st
         setting after fees. Mutual funds are sorted into portfolios on the 1  day in each year based on their
         performances the previous year. Portfolio 1 includes the worst performers and portfolio 3 the best
         performers. Each portfolio contains 1/3 of the funds and the returns are equally weighted for each
         mutual fund within a portfolio. VWRmRf is the market excess return constructed by the SIXPRX
         index return minus the STIBOR 30-day rate. SMB and HML are our self-constructed Swedish Fama-
         French      factors,      mimicking      portfolios      for      size      and      book-to-market.
                  Monthly                             Fama-French 3-Factor Model
                  Excess     Standard
    Portfolio       Return    Deviation     α-Alpha    VWRmRf        SMB        HML        R²
        1          0.004006    0.0643781    0.0018182     1.0132530    0.0191282   -0.0421088    0.9385
  1-P-value                                0.189        0.000        0.662        0.187
        2          0.003496    0.0623892    0.0013016     1.0164910   -0.0142152   -0.0056442    0.9858
  2-P-value                                0.047        0.000        0.246        0.614
        3          0.003703    0.0638236   0.0015872    0.9982334    -0.0040297   -0.0427202     0.9197
  3: P-value                                0.320        0.000        0.889        0.333
    3-1 spread      -0.000303    0.0204153    -0.000231    -0.0150196    -0.023158    -0.000611    0.0067
  3-1-P-value                               0.897         0.63         0.572        0.989
                                        Table 8
                         Carhart 4  factor model (Net of Fees)
             Monthly mutual fund returns are regressed to the monthly independent variables in a Carhart setting
                                                                                          st
            after fees. Mutual funds are sorted into portfolios on the 1   day in each year based on their
             performances the previous year. Portfolio 1 includes the worst performers and portfolio 3 the best
             performers. Each portfolio contains 1/3 of the funds and the returns are equally weighted for each
            mutual fund within a portfolio. VWRmRf is the market excess return constructed by the SIXPRX
            index return minus the STIBOR 30-day rate. SMB and HML are our self-constructed Swedish Fama-
            French factors, mimicking portfolios for size and book-to-market. PR1YR is the self-constructed
             momentum factor, mimicking portfolio for returns from the previous 11 months.
                Monthly                               Carhart 4-Factor Model
                Excess     Standard
   Portfolio      Return     Deviation     α-Alpha    VWRmRf       SMB       HML      PR1YR      R²
      1         0.0028599    0.0643631     0.0005945    1.0121950   0.0160947   -0.0403363   0.0054602    0.9393
1-P-value                                 0.664         0.000        0.715       0.200       0.656
      2         0.0022341    0.0624945     0.0002974    1.0223440   -0.0079286   -0.0141783   -0.0177648    0.9863
2-P-value                                 0.644         0.000        0.499       0.209       0.004
      3         0.0025767    0.0634897     0.0003276    0.9904786   -0.0068677   -0.0370914   0.0097266    0.9196
3: P-value                                 0.836         0.000        0.818       0.330       0.630
  3-1 spread     -0.0002833    0.0204863    -0.0002669    -0.0217166   -0.0229623   0.0032449   0.0042663    0.0091
3-1-P-value                                0.883         0.577        0.936       0.936       0.843

                                        Table 9
                       Carhart 4  factor model (Gross of Fees)
             Monthly mutual fund returns are regressed to the monthly independent variables in a Carhart setting
                                                                                           st
            before fees. Mutual funds are sorted into portfolios on the 1  day in each year based on their
             performances the previous year. Portfolio 1 includes the worst performers and portfolio 3 the best
             performers. Each portfolio contains 1/3 of the funds and the returns are equally weighted for each
            mutual fund within a portfolio. VWRmRf is the market excess return constructed by the SIXPRX
            index return minus the STIBOR 30-day rate. SMB and HML are our self-constructed Swedish Fama-
            French factors, mimicking portfolios for size and book-to-market. PR1YR is the self-constructed
             momentum factor, mimicking portfolio for returns from the previous 11 months.
                  Monthly                             Carhart 4-Factor Model
                  Excess    Standard
     Portfolio      Return    Deviation    α-Alpha    VWRmRf       SMB       HML      PR1YR      R²
        1         0.004006    0.0643781    0.0017336    1.0116780    0.0187995   -0.0390103    0.0055709   0.9386
  1-P-value                               0.210        0.000        0.670       0.217       0.649
        2         0.003496    0.0623892    0.0015724    1.0215330   -0.0131632   -0.0155637   -0.0178351   0.9866
  2-P-value                               0.014        0.000        0.258       0.163       0.004
        3         0.003703    0.0638236    0.0014410    0.9955103   -0.0045979   -0.0373627    0.0096328    0.920
  3: P-value                               0.366        0.000        0.877        0.327        0.638
    3-1 spread     -0.000303    0.0204153   -0.0002927    -0.0161679    -0.023398    0.0016477    0.0040619   0.0071
  3-1-P-value                              0.872        0.614        0.571       0.967        0.852
                                      Table 10
          First two years vs. later years in a Carhart setting (Net of Fees)
           Monthly mutual fund returns are regressed to the monthly independent variables in a Carhart 4-factor
           setting after fees. The data sample has been divided into two sub samples where the first sub sample
           contains all return observations the first two years of an individual fund in the cross-section. The
           second sub-sample contains all other return observations for an individual fund in the cross section.
          VWRmRf is the market excess return constructed by the SIXPRX index return minus the STIBOR 30-
          day rate. SMB and HML are our self-constructed Swedish Fama-French factors, mimicking portfolios
           for size and book-to-market. PR1YR is the self-constructed momentum factor, mimicking portfolio for
           returns from the previous 11 months.
                        Monthly                         Carhart 4-Factor Model
                        Excess    Standard
      Portfolio         Return    Deviation    α-Alpha   VWRmRf     SMB      HML     PR1YR      R²
Initial returns 2 first years    0.010408   0.0617941   0.004024    1.008691    -0.00505   0.008378   -0.00293    0.9614
P-value                                        0.002       0.000      0.835      0.641      0.775
Later returns             0.002289   0.0628726   0.000128    1.011847   0.001298    -0.03236   -0.00062    0.9722
P-value                                        0.887       0.000      0.955      0.133      0.949

                                      Table 11
         First two years vs. later years in a Carhart setting (Gross of Fees)
           Monthly mutual fund returns are regressed to the monthly independent variables in a Carhart 4-factor
           setting before fees. The data sample has been divided into two sub samples where the first sub sample
           contains all return observations the first two years of an individual fund in the cross-section. The
           second sub-sample contains all other return observations for an individual fund in the cross section.
          VWRmRf is the market excess return constructed by the SIXPRX index return minus the STIBOR 30-
          day rate. SMB and HML are our self-constructed Swedish Fama-French factors, mimicking portfolios
           for size and book-to-market. PR1YR is the self-constructed momentum factor, mimicking portfolio for
           returns from the previous 11 months.
                        Monthly                         Carhart 4-Factor Model
                        Excess    Standard
       Portfolio         Return    Deviation    α-Alpha   VWRmRf     SMB      HML     PR1YR     R²
Initial returns 2 first years   0.011506   0.0618537   0.005115    1.009669    -0.00519   0.008326   -0.00282    0.9615
P-value                                        0.000       0.000      0.830      0.642     0.783
Later returns             0.003473   0.0629501   0.001311     1.01309   0.001235    -0.03246   -0.00063    0.9721
P-value                                        0.150       0.000      0.957      0.133     0.948
                                     Table 12
             Small Cap Funds vs. All other funds in a Carhart Setting
                                   (Net of Fees)
          Monthly mutual fund returns are regressed to the monthly independent variables in a Carhart 4-factor
          setting after fees. The data sample has been divided into two sub samples where the first sub sample
          contains all return observations from each small cap fund in the cross-section. The second sub-sample
          contains the return observations for all other types of funds in the cross section. VWRmRf is the
         market excess return constructed by the SIXPRX index return minus the STIBOR 30-day rate. SMB
         and HML are our self-constructed Swedish Fama-French factors, mimicking portfolios for size and
         book-to-market. PR1YR is the self-constructed momentum factor, mimicking portfolio for returns
          from the previous 11 months.

                       Monthly                         Carhart 4-Factor Model
                       Excess    Standard
      Portfolio         Return    Deviation   α-Alpha   VWRmRf     SMB      HML     PR1YR      R²
Other funds              0.002529    0.061729    -0.01129   1.010117    -0.00884   -0.01238   -0.01129    0.9900
P-value                                        0.342      0.000      0.421      0.200      0.039
Small Cap funds          0.002925    0.071071   0.000221   1.002152   0.033573   -0.07009    0.03701    0.7894
P-value                                        0.937      0.000      0.653      0.290      0.202

                                     Table 13
             Small Cap Funds vs. All other funds in a Carhart Setting
                                  (Gross of Fees)
          Monthly mutual fund returns are regressed to the monthly independent variables in a Carhart 4-factor
          setting before fees. The data sample has been divided into two sub samples where the first sub sample
          contains all return observations from each small cap fund in the cross-section. The second sub-sample
          contains the return observations for all other types of funds in the cross section. VWRmRf is the
         market excess return constructed by the SIXPRX index return minus the STIBOR 30-day rate. SMB
         and HML are our self-constructed Swedish Fama-French factors, mimicking portfolios for size and
         book-to-market. PR1YR is the self-constructed momentum factor, mimicking portfolio for returns
          from the previous 11 months.
                       Monthly                         Carhart 4-Factor Model
                       Excess    Standard
      Portfolio         Return    Deviation    α-Alpha    VWRmRf     SMB      HML     PR1YR     R²
Other funds             0.003678    0.061801   0.0016673   1.011295    -0.00891   -0.01248   -0.01131    0.9900
P-value                                        0.003      0.000      0.418     0.197     0.039
Small Cap funds          0.004193    0.071162    0.001485   1.003417   0.033577   -0.07016   0.03709    0.7894
P-value                                        0.597      0.000      0.654     0.291     0.201
                                     Table 14
          4  Big Banks vs. Other Investment Firms in a Carhart Setting
                                   (Net of Fees)
          Monthly mutual fund returns are regressed to the monthly independent variables in a Carhart 4-factor
          setting after fees. The data sample has been divided into two sub samples where the first sub sample
          contains all return observations from funds offered by one of the large banks (Nordea, Handelsbanken,
         Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken and Swedbank) in Sweden in the cross-section. The second sub-
          sample contains the return observations for funds that are offered by other investment firms in the
         cross section. VWRmRf is the market excess return constructed by the SIXPRX index return minus
         the STIBOR 30-day rate. SMB and HML are our self-constructed Swedish Fama-French factors,
         mimicking portfolios for size and book-to-market. PR1YR is the self-constructed momentum factor,
          mimicking portfolio for returns from the previous 11 months.

                 Monthly                            Carhart 4-Factor Model
                 Excess     Standard
   Portfolio       Return     Deviation    α-Alpha   VWRmRf     SMB      HML     PR1YR      R²
Other Banks       0.0029648    0.0628573    0.000731    1.006277    0.003324   -0.02926    0.004517     0.9655
P-value                                    0.685       0.000       0.900      0.231       0.685
4-Big Banks       0.0017714    0.0622991     -0.0002     1.01602    -0.00431    -0.0181    -0.01428     0.9842
P-value                                    0.771       0.000       0.773      0.129       0.056

                                     Table 15
          4  Big Banks vs. Other Investment Firms in a Carhart Setting
                                  (Gross of Fees)
          Monthly mutual fund returns are regressed to the monthly independent variables in a Carhart 4-factor
          setting before fees. The data sample has been divided into two sub samples where the first sub sample
          contains all return observations from funds offered by one of the large banks (Nordea, Handelsbanken,
         Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken and Swedbank) in Sweden in the cross-section. The second sub-
          sample contains the return observations for funds that are offered by other investment firms in the
         cross section. VWRmRf is the market excess return constructed by the SIXPRX index return minus
         the STIBOR 30-day rate. SMB and HML are our self-constructed Swedish Fama-French factors,
         mimicking portfolios for size and book-to-market. PR1YR is the self-constructed momentum factor,
          mimicking portfolio for returns from the previous 11 months.

                  Monthly                          Carhart 4-Factor Model
                   Excess    Standard
    Portfolio       Return    Deviation    α-Alpha   VWRmRf     SMB      HML     PR1YR      R²
Other Banks         0.004123    0.062933    0.001887    1.007481    0.003269   -0.02937    0.004523     0.9655
P-value                                    0.063       0.000       0.901      0.230       0.685
4-Big Banks         0.002984    0.062372    0.001006    1.017213    -0.00438   -0.01813   -0.014300     0.9842
P-value                                    0.153       0.000       0.770      0.129       0.057
                    No No No YESNo  No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No

                Alpha Significant at1%




                          no  no  YESno  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no
   setting

                          YES but negative
                Alpha Significant at5%


   Carhart

    a                   No No YESNo  No No No    No No No No No No No No No No No No No No YESNo No
   in
                          YES but negative                  YES but negative
                 Alpha Significant at10%

   funds
                                                                                                                      0,85281
                                                        0,085631
                        0,02077620,16613210,85451260,00658260,71750410,57532140,15225140,25767990,84749950,81639760,46989080,92620920,60529410,91486320,27744450,17595360,99339630,74930140,25005380,68599680,38365210,95441650,05066830,6862179
(1/3)       Fees)Alpha P-value

16
       of

                   ALPHA                                         0,000243                 0,002017-0,000488
                         -0,00225810,00148240,00059990,00403990,0008755-0,0015647-0,0016741-0,0018041-0,0019539-0,0007817-0,0004371-0,00488590,0007415-0,00031790,00183940,00173670,00002970,0004382  0,0010499-0,00020640,00395170,0002301-0,0006181
Tableindividual    (Net


   for                                                       1,1005
                     Beta1,0881570,9401341,018477    1,008391,1184451,1476461,0915211,1227751,0117321,141165              1,14096 1,159346       1,0186561,052152
                                    0,97427090,8565283                      0,97674110,97515130,87586620,95800470,9972498      0,97708680,96045270,8752563  0,9851968


                   M. Fee1,50%1,40%0,60%0,40%1,50%1,50%1,70%1,10%1,70%1,70%1,70%1,70%1,50%1,50%1,50%1,50%1,25%1,70%1,70%1,65%1,20%1,30%1,30%1,22%1,60%1,70%

   Statistics

                    ISIN               N/A N/A

                      SE0000709339SE0000735789SE0001185000SE0000739195SE0000709016SE0000709164SE0000708950SE0000709230SE0000709099SE0000709123SE0000432775LU0029376117SE0000432809SE0000810806SE0000432767SE0000433351SE0000433344SE0000577322SE0000731135SE0000569691SE0001472937SE0000428336SE0000433369SE0000813917







   Descriptive




              FUNDNAME




                          ABN AMRO SverigeAktie-Ansvar SverigeAMF Pension Aktiefond SmåbolagAMF Pension Aktiefond SverigeAncoria Insurance Sverigefonden HQAncoria Insurance UtdelningsaktierSverigeBanco Etisk SverigeBanco Etisk Sverige SpecialBanco HumanfondenBanco SmåbolagBanco Svensk MiljöBanco Teknik & InnovationCarlson SmåbolagsfondenCarlson SwedenCarlson Sweden Micro CapCarlson Sverige KoncisCarlson SverigefondCarnegie SmåbolagCarnegie SverigeCatella ReavinstfondCicero SverigeDanske Fonder SverigeDanske Fonder Sverige FokusDidner & Gerge AktiefondEldsjäl SverigefondEnter Sverige
                     No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No  No

                Alpha Significant at1%



                       no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  YESno  no  YESno  no  no  no  no
   setting

                Alpha Significant at5%

   Carhart

    a                No No No No No No No No No No No No YESNo No YESNo No No No  No
   in

                 Alpha Significant at10%

   funds
                                                0,853427       0,1858120,1858120,1787550,983568
                         0,65092110,72987270,92617050,38392970,61664150,61372990,30755510,94579260,5577011  0,0377502  0,02768250,54857620,88928860,95303110,88523930,4903589
(2/3)       Fees)Alpha P-value

16
       of

                  ALPHA                                                0,006054
                         0,0006887-0,00082370,0000617-0,00055350,0016858-0,0004677-0,0001604-0,00085180,0001733-0,0013837-0,0026995-0,00269950,0028384-0,00550990,00007650,00096620,00049140,0000551-0,0001688-0,0011424
Tableindividual    (Net


    for            Beta      1,01822
                                     1,0070971,0388871,0322191,062174               1,0815381,1320510,9400931,0525851,0488891,0165011,114701
                         0,98634510,9859863  0,9882657      0,95824070,83467550,76788950,76788950,9385998  0,8296975


                   M. Fee0,50%1,40%0,70%0,40%1,50%2,50%1,50%1,50%1,50%1,85%0,75%0,75%1,40%1,40%1,40%1,60%1,60%1,60%1,30%1,50%1,00%

   Statistics

                      ISIN

                       SE0000813925SE0001882309SE0000434714SE0000615890SE0001091018SE0000355968SE0000356032SE0000582033SE0000356065FI0008808258LU0093407939LU0093408150SE0000429789SE0000436958LU0225330371SE0000740698SE0000740680SE0000837239SE0000837221SE0000625238SE0000865578








   Descriptive




               FUNDNAME



                           Enter Sverige FokusErik Penser SverigefondFolksam Aktiefond SverigeFolksam Tjänstemannafond SverigeGustavia SverigeHandelsbanken BofondHandelsbanken RadiohjälpsfondHandelsbanken ReavinstfondHandelsbanken SmåbolagsfondHandelsbanken Sverige SelektivHQ Fonder Swedish Equity Fund AHQ Fonder Swedish Equity Fund BHQ Fonder SverigefondKaupthing SmåbolagKaupthing Swedish GrowthLannebo Fonder AB SmåbolagLannebo Fonder AB SverigeLänsförsäkringar SmåbolagsfondLänsförsäkringar SverigefondNordea Etiskt UrvalNordea Privat Banking SvenskaPortföljen
                    No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No

                Alpha Significant at1%



                       no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  YESno  no  no
   setting

                Alpha Significant at5%

   Carhart

    a                  No No No No No No No No no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no YESno no no
   in

                 Alpha Significant at10%

   funds
                                                                                                  0,84672
                                        0,796887
                        0,16013070,23697950,23256980,23504890,85054110,86200620,97994630,84708360,46117790,74311360,56214420,24461670,83400250,10920770,94259790,42705490,29735760,49766350,23741610,39784210,35338570,89836040,04488750,78218730,56998450,2110097
(3/3)       Fees)Alpha P-value

16
       of

               ALPHA
                         -0,0014353-0,00118340,0037475-0,00179530,00022630,00039130,0004678-0,0000494-0,00014870,0005256-0,0002664-0,00066850,00319080,0005049-0,0012766-0,00008340,00079810,00322280,0024113-0,00031760,00094980,00085670,00196760,00038640,00161940,00239410,00075070,0016832
Tableindividual    (Net


    for            Beta              0,97282
                         1,0629321,075404   1,0071951,0184961,0783791,0068711,0023211,0240611,007246   1,0236711,057065   1,2274991,0454130,9884261,001665   1,039861   1,037105
                                0,75516470,9615765                         0,97580010,9174815  0,99956120,9985332          0,61538660,92804590,91912560,8658602


                   Fees1,50%1,43%2,00%1,40%0,70%1,40%1,40%1,60%1,40%0,50%1,75%1,50%1,50%1,50%1,30%1,30%1,70%1,40%1,70%1,40%1,40%1,70%1,50%1,50%0,70%1,80%1,50%1,20%


   Statistics

                    ISIN        N/A

                      LU0087941380SE0000427726SE0000434094SE0000987216SE0000602294SE0000602302SE0001195843SE0000996233SE0000537771LU0047322432SE0000433278SE0000434201SE0000577389SE0000775298SE0000775280SE0000432759SE0000810814IE0005270263IE0031388014SE0000810913SE0000432742SE0001015348SE0001015355SE0000522526SE0002023036SE0001112319SE0000493512







   Descriptive




               FUNDNAME

                          Nordea Sweden FundNordea SverigefondenODIN Sverige SEKRobur Ethica Miljö SverigeRobur Ethica Sverige MEGARobur ExportfondRobur Småbolagsfond SverigeRobur Svensk AktieportföljRobur SverigefondRobur Sverigefond MEGASEB Etisk Sverige - Lux UtdSEB Stiftelsefond SverigeSEB Sverige Småbol Chans/RiskSEB Sverige SmåbolagsfondSEB SverigefondSEB Sverigefond Chans/RiskSkandia CancerfondenSkandia Småbolag SverigeSkandia Swedish EquitySkandia Swedish Growth A1Skandia SverigeSkandia VärldsnaturfondenSpiltan Aktiefond StabilSpiltan Aktiefond SverigeSPP Aktiefond SverigeSwedbank Robur Stella SverigeVästernorrlandsfondenÖhman Fonder Sverigefond
                    No No No YESNo  No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No

                Alpha Significant at1%



                       no  YESno     no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  YESno  no  no  no  no  no  YESno  no  no  no
                            YES

                Alpha Significant at5%

   setting

                    No YESNo YESNo  No No No No No No No No No No YESYESNo No YESNo YESNo YESNo No No No

                      Alpha Significant at 10%
   Carhart

   a

                                                               0,601446                                                    0,467571
     in                   0,29962580,01399290,73653080,00334490,37955230,91108470,82781010,57790030,63723370,87507360,60810140,56866650,16574680,75304480,07079510,03113830,68568260,17670480,05394780,66985220,07768510,80751160,01436960,20776070,60005880,8841878

                     Alpha P-value


     funds                       0,002660,001100,004380,00213            0,000640,00099 0,001500,002000,000940,003100,002780,001450,001860,003400,000520,002140,000880,004980,001570,000800,001110,00035
                     ALPHA-0,00101            -0,00031-0,00025-0,00089-0,00053    -0,00347

(1/3)       Fees)
17     of             1,0895141,018982   1,0096441,1200261,1486941,0930641,1243621,0131621,142778             1,1425731,1020561,160937      1,0196891,0535510,9865870,987133
                          0,94122740,97459410,8575953                    0,97795850,97636670,87695740,95919410,9982855      0,97805950,96148970,8761989      0,9867541

                    Beta
Tableindividual
     (Gross
   for



                     RM-RF0,994000,982700,935800,981500,938000,970700,990100,985600,990200,937200,993400,756400,915700,990000,873600,964300,985400,944400,992800,972900,968600,972400,913900,950400,994500,951200,952000,96550

                      Correlation Ri-rf to
   Statistics



                   Fees1,50%1,40%0,60%0,40%1,50%1,50%1,70%1,10%1,70%1,70%1,70%1,70%1,50%1,50%1,50%1,50%1,25%1,70%1,70%1,65%1,20%1,30%1,30%1,22%1,60%1,70%0,50%1,40%




                    ISIN               N/A N/A
  Descriptive
                      SE0000709339SE0000735789SE0001185000SE0000739195SE0000709016SE0000709164SE0000708950SE0000709230SE0000709099SE0000709123SE0000432775LU0029376117SE0000432809SE0000810806SE0000432767SE0000433351SE0000433344SE0000577322SE0000731135SE0000569691SE0001472937SE0000428336SE0000433369SE0000813917SE0000813925SE0001882309












              FUNDNAME




                          ABN AMRO SverigeAktie-Ansvar SverigeAMF Pension Aktiefond SmåbolagAMF Pension Aktiefond SverigeAncoria Insurance Sverigefonden HQAncoria Insurance UtdelningsaktierSverigeBanco Etisk SverigeBanco Etisk Sverige SpecialBanco HumanfondenBanco SmåbolagBanco Svensk MiljöBanco Teknik & InnovationCarlson SmåbolagsfondenCarlson SwedenCarlson Sweden Micro CapCarlson Sverige KoncisCarlson SverigefondCarnegie SmåbolagCarnegie SverigeCatella ReavinstfondCicero SverigeDanske Fonder SverigeDanske Fonder Sverige FokusDidner & Gerge AktiefondEldsjäl SverigefondEnter SverigeEnter Sverige FokusErik Penser Sverigefond
                          no  no no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no YESno no  YESno  no no  no  no No No No no  no  no  no  no

                   Alpha Significant at1%



                          no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  YESno  no     no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no
                                                             YES

                   Alpha Significant at5%

   setting

                       No No No YESNo No No No No No YESNo No YESNo No No No  No No No YESNo No No No No

                          Alpha Significant at 10%
   Carhart

   a

                                                                                                                       0,452619
     in                       0,33202030,72977170,38386620,08175470,20940010,62978240,57583480,94524570,30892070,30892070,00361680,28891210,73707720,00754860,15453040,60465680,22395590,35458630,85280090,85832180,99063280,08525750,67842680,35771660,54309620,5132729

                         Alpha P-value


     funds                      0,00065 0,002940,001630,001090,000400,001430,00016    0,00401 0,001250,007400,002310,001830,001140,00109     0,000010,00543 0,000810,001560,001640,00129
                        ALPHA -0,00022                   -0,00207-0,00207-0,00435                    -0,00031-0,00018    -0,00063

(2/3)       Fees)
17     of                 1,0188121,0074320,9894931,0410471,0335051,0634980,959435          1,0827961,133368   1,0539851,0500221,0177671,1156251,0642571,076682   1,0077791,0196811,079809
                                                  0,83595230,76836680,76836680,9396914  0,83079810,9413409                0,75641860,96269490,9739515

                       Beta
Tableindividual
     (Gross
   for



                        RM-RF0,991500,991500,905100,983200,989300,984800,905700,777100,934000,934000,937900,879000,975800,915000,964900,923600,987300,991700,989300,991300,991800,915600,992600,992100,968600,920200,96420

                          Correlation Ri-rf to
   Statistics



                      Fees0,70%0,40%1,50%2,50%1,50%1,50%1,50%1,85%0,75%0,75%1,40%1,40%1,40%1,60%1,60%1,60%1,30%1,50%1,00%1,50%1,43%2,00%1,40%0,70%1,40%1,40%1,60%




                        ISIN                                                                                N/A
  Descriptive
                          SE0000434714SE0000615890SE0001091018SE0000355968SE0000356032SE0000582033SE0000356065FI0008808258LU0093407939LU0093408150SE0000429789SE0000436958LU0225330371SE0000740698SE0000740680SE0000837239SE0000837221SE0000625238SE0000865578LU0087941380SE0000427726SE0000434094SE0000987216SE0000602294SE0000602302SE0001195843














                  FUNDNAME



                              Folksam Aktiefond SverigeFolksam Tjänstemannafond SverigeGustavia SverigeHandelsbanken BofondHandelsbanken RadiohjälpsfondHandelsbanken ReavinstfondHandelsbanken SmåbolagsfondHandelsbanken Sverige SelektivHQ Fonder Swedish Equity Fund AHQ Fonder Swedish Equity Fund BHQ Fonder SverigefondKaupthing SmåbolagKaupthing Swedish GrowthLannebo Fonder AB SmåbolagLannebo Fonder AB SverigeLänsförsäkringar SmåbolagsfondLänsförsäkringar SverigefondNordea Etiskt UrvalNordea Privat Banking SvenskaPortföljenNordea Sweden FundNordea SverigefondenODIN Sverige SEKRobur Ethica Miljö SverigeRobur Ethica Sverige MEGARobur ExportfondRobur Småbolagsfond SverigeRobur Svensk Aktieportfölj
                          no no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  no  YESno  no  no  YESno  no  no

                   Alpha Significant at1%



                         no no no no no no no no YESno no no YESYESno no YESno no YES

                   Alpha Significant at5%

   setting

                       No No No No No No No No YESNo No No YESYESNo No YESNo No YES

                          Alpha Significant at 10%
   Carhart

   a

                                                              0,156319                              0,046969
     in                      0,18690810,18695590,14281820,61187450,10596030,46589680,81047950,38750080,02853180,28218120,60432580,00909160,02583670,13077540,58823190,00668410,65328790,1327246

                         Alpha P-value


     funds                      0,001020,000940,001200,000590,004450,00176 0,001000,002220,004400,003840,000850,002120,002280,003220,001640,002210,003910,002010,00269
                     ALPHA                 -0,00019

(3/3)       Fees)
17     of                1,0080421,0027371,0255511,008501   1,0247761,0582071,0009731,2292341,0466271,00308 0,9291991,0404650,9205051,038139
                                      0,97701630,9186247     0,9996939  0,98957570,6161485     0,8669342

                       Beta
Tableindividual
     (Gross
   for



                        RM-RF0,994900,994200,988100,917100,930700,904600,989900,980800,985200,909800,953200,993400,991800,984700,844500,741400,982000,924300,986500,98980

                          Correlation Ri-rf to
   Statistics



                      Fees1,40%0,50%1,75%1,50%1,50%1,50%1,30%1,30%1,70%1,40%1,70%1,40%1,40%1,70%1,50%1,50%0,70%1,80%1,50%1,20%





                          ISIN
  Descriptive
                          SE0000996233SE0000537771LU0047322432SE0000433278SE0000434201SE0000577389SE0000775298SE0000775280SE0000432759SE0000810814IE0005270263IE0031388014SE0000810913SE0000432742SE0001015348SE0001015355SE0000522526SE0002023036SE0001112319SE0000493512











                  FUNDNAME

                              Robur SverigefondRobur Sverigefond MEGASEB Etisk Sverige - Lux UtdSEB Stiftelsefond SverigeSEB Sverige Småbol Chans/RiskSEB Sverige SmåbolagsfondSEB SverigefondSEB Sverigefond Chans/RiskSkandia CancerfondenSkandia Småbolag SverigeSkandia Swedish EquitySkandia Swedish Growth A1Skandia SverigeSkandia VärldsnaturfondenSpiltan Aktiefond StabilSpiltan Aktiefond SverigeSPP Aktiefond SverigeSwedbank Robur Stella SverigeVästernorrlandsfondenÖhman Fonder Sverigefond